ANALYSIS OF THE GERM OF THE JEWELS: A TREATISE ON THE ULTIMATE DOCTRINE OF THE GREAT VEHICLE
I bow to the Saint Vajrasattva.
THE MATRIX OF THE TATHĀGATA
I. Introduction
The Buddha, the doctrine, and the community, The Essence [of the Buddha], the Supreme Enlightenment, The Virtuous Qualities [of the Buddha]; - These are the Admantine Subjects, [which show] Briefly, the body of the whole text.
The word ‘vajrapada’ (admantine subject) means the term, i.e. the basis, which expresses the meaning of the Enlightenment which is similar to a thunderbolt [or diamond]. Here, it being difficult to be penetrated by the knowledge consisting in studying and thinking, the meaning [of the Enlightenment] which is not capable of being explained but is to be realized by oneself, should be understood as ‘like a thunderbolt’.Those letters, which express that meaning by making manifest the way which is favorable for its acquisition, are called ‘pada’, just because they are the basis of that meaning. Thus, by both meanings, i.e. being hard to be penetrated and being the basis, the character of ‘vajrapada’, of the meaning as well as of the letters, is to be understood.Now, what is ‘artha’, (the meaning) and what is ‘vyañjana’ (the letter)? ‘artha’ is the sevenfold meaning of the Enlightenment, viz. 1) the Buddha, 2) the Doctrine, 3) the Community, 4) the Essence of the Buddha, 5) the Supreme Enlightenment, 6) The Virtuous Qualities of the Buddha, and 7) the Acts of the Buddha. These are called ‘artha’.The letters, by which the sevenfold meaning of the Enlightenment is indicated or is manifested, are called ‘vyañjana’. And this teaching of ‘vajrapada’ should be understood in detail according to the Sūtras.
1) ‘Buddha’: “Verily, O Ānanda, invisible is the Tathāgata. He cannot be seen by eyes”. 2) ‘Dharma’: “Verily, O Ānanda, unutterable is the Doctrine. It cannot be heard by ears”. 3) ‘Saṃgha’: “Verily, O Ānanda, the Holy Community is of an immutable character. It cannot be comletely served, either by body or by mind”. These are the [first] three vajrapadas, which are to be understood according to the Dṛḍādhyāśaya-parivarta.‘Dhātu’: “Verily, O Śāriputra, this meaning is the subject for the Tathāgata [and only belongs to] the sphere of the Tathāgata. This meaning, O Śāriputra, can neither be known nor be seen, nor be examined correctly through the knowledge of the Śrāvakas and the Pratyekabuddhas. Needless to say, this applies to the case of ignorant and ordinary beings, except when they have faith in the Tathāgata. O Śāriputra, the ultimate Truth is really approachable only by faith [in the Tathāhata]. O Śāriputra, the ultimate Truth is a synonym of the mass of living beings.The mass of living beings is, O Śāriputra, nothing but a synonym of the Matrix of the Tathāgata. The Matrix of the Tathāgata is, O Śāriputra, nothing but a synonym of the Absolute Body”. Thus is the forth ‘vajrapada’ and is to be understood according to the Anūnatvāpūrṇatvanirdeśa-parivarta.
‘Bodhi’: “O Lord, the Supreme Perfect Enlightenment is a synonym of the Sphere of the Nirvāṇa. Sphere of the Nirvāṇa is nothing but a synonym of the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata”. Thus is the fifth Vajrapada which is to be understood according to the Ārya Śrīmālā-sūtra.
‘Guṇa’: “O Śāriputra, that which is called Absolute Body, preached by the Tathāgata, is of indivisible nature, of qualities inseparable from the Wisdom, that is to say, [indivisible from or endowed] with the properties of the Buddha which far surpass the particles of sands of the Gaṅgā in number”. This is the sixth Varjrapada and is to be understood according to the Anūnatvāpūrṇatvanirdeśa.
‘Karman’: “O Mañjuśri, the Tathāgata never imagines anything nor distinguishes falsely. That is to say, his acts of this kind flow forth without any effort, without any imagination or any thought construction”. This is the seventh Vajrapada which is to be understood according to the Tathāgataguṇajñānācintyaviṣayāvatāranirdeśa. In short, these are the Vajrapadas which should be known as the body of this whole text, in the sense of being a collection of preliminary explanations.
(The Essential Character of the subjects.) Of these [seven subjects], Accompanied by their own characteristics, one should know respectively the first three subjects From the introductory chapter in the Dhāraṇirājasūtra And the [latter] four from [the chapter on] the distinction] Between the qualities of the Bodhisattva and those of the Buddha || 2x ||
[the meaning of this verse is as follows]: And of these seven Vajrapadas, accompanied by the explanation of their own characteristics, the three subjects should be known as being from the introductory chapter (nidāna-parivarta) of the Holy Dhāraṇīśvararājasūtra, and then the remaining four [are to be known] from the chapter on the distinction between the qualities of the Bodhisattva and those of the Buddha respectively. Therefore, it is said:
“The Lord has has perfectly realized the equality of all things, has set the wheel of Doctrine going well and has kindly trained numberless disciples”.By these three fundamental sentences, respectively, one should know the arrangement of the three Jewels [in the aspect of] their successive origination and accomplishment. The remaining four subjects are to be known as the statement of the accomplishment of the causes which correspond to the origin of the three Jewels.Now, on the 8th Stage of Bodhisattva, as the power of controlling all elements of phenomena has been attained, so it is said: “He (=The Lord), sitting in the exellent Seat of Enlightenment, realized perfectly the equality of all things.On the 9th Stage of Bodhisattva, he is endowed with the power of expressing the Highest Doctrine, knows easily the intentions of all living beings, brings all faculties [of living beings] to the highest perfection and becomes an expert in the removal of the chain of Defiling forces in all living beings. Therefore it is said: “Having realized the perfect Enlightenment, he has well set the wheel of Doctrine going”.On the 10th Stage of Bodhisattva, after attaining the anoitment for the prince recognized as the next king in the highest religious empire of the Buddha, he is immediately calmed in the Buddha’s effortless acts uninterruptedly. Therefore it is said: “He who well set the wheel of Doctrine going has kindly trained numberless disciples”.Furthermore, the same qualification of having trained numberless disciples is shown in the same text, immediately after this sentence. It runs as follows: “He was together with the assembly of a large number of monks, and with the assembly of numberless Bodhisattvas”.As he has well trained those who are in the enlightenment of the Śrāvaka and up to that of the Buddha, step by step, it is said: “Thus being endowed with the virtuous qualities,...” &c.
And then immediately after the [passage of the] doctrine on the nature of qualities of Śrāvakas and Bodhisattvas, in the reference to the Buddha’s inconceivable leadership in regard to tranquility, the establishment of the distinguishable qualities of the Jewel of the Buddha is known to be through the accomplishment of the great palace adorned with circular ornament of jewels, through bringing his people together into the assembly of Tathāgatas, through the completion of various kinds of worship with divine beings, and through the pouring of rain from the cloud of praises.And next, through the splendid arrangement of the seat of the Doctrine and its brightness, and through the glorification of the name and qualities of the various doctrines, there should be known the establishment of the distinguishable qualities of the Jewel of the Doctrine.And next, in the light of the mutual manifestation of the power of the acting sphere of various tranquilities of the Bodhisattvas, and in the light of the description of their various forms of qualities, there should be known the establishment of the distinguishable qualities of the Jewel of the Community.And again, immediately after this, in the reference to the Buddha’s presentation of the highest fearlessness and confidence [in speech] on account of the prince of the supreme religious king [to the Bodhisattvas], through the sprinkling of the Buddha’s light. And through the explanation of the highest praise to the true virtues of the Tathāgata,through the description in the form of discussion of the highest Doctrine of the Great Vehicle, and, as the result of that knowledge, and through the manifestation of the attainment of the highest sovereignty; through these three, respectively, the highest establishment of the distinguishable qualities of three Jewels is to be understood.
And also therein the introductory chapter of this Sūtra, The Essence of the Buddha is explained by a description of the sixtyfold appliance as the purifying factors of that Essence. Because the Essence of the Buddha deserves to be applied the purification, in so far as it has qualities of an object to be purified.And because of the effect of this meaning, in the 10 Stages of Bodhisattva, there is illustrated again an analogy of the purifying process of gold. In this Sūtra (the Dhāraṇirāja-sūtra) too, after the description of the Acts of the Buddha, the allegory of unpurified Vaiḍūrya stone is illustrated.
It runs as follows: “O noble youth, take for instance a skilful jewel-maker who knows quite well how to purify precious stones. Having taken out an unpurified precious stone from the mine, and having washed it with acid salt water, he then polishes it by rubbing with blackhair cloth.But with this much work, he never ceases to make efforts. After that, having washed the stone with meat juice of bitter taste, he polishes it by rubbing with a woollen blanket.Even with this much work, he never ceases to make efforts. After that, having washed it with great medical liquid, he polishes it with closely-woven cotton cloth. After having been polished and having been separated from all impure metals mingled with it, it is called a precious Vaiḍūrya stone.Similarly, O noble youth, the Tathāgata too, having known the unpurified element of living beings, creates disgust in the mind of those living beings who are attached to the world of transmigration through the teaching of being afraid of the non-eternity, suffering, impersonality and impurity [of this world], and causes them to enter the discipline of the sacred Doctrine.After that, he makes them realize the guiding manner of the Tathāgata by the teaching of [the threefold gate to the emancipation, viz.] non-substantiality, non-distinction and desirelessness.Even with this much of act, the Tathāgata never ceases to make efforts. After that, through the teaching of the irreversible wheel of the Doctrine and through the teaching of the ‘purification of three circles’, he causes those living beings who have different kinds of characteristics and origins, to enter the sphere of the Tathāgata. Having entered [the sphere of the Tathāgata], those same beings, when they have realized the true nature of the Tathāgata, are called unparalleled venerables”.Having in view this Essence of the Tathāgata, which is of pure origin, it is said as follows:
“Just as gold, though it is invisible among stones and sands, Comes to be seen by the process of purification, Similarly, in this world of living beings The Tathāgata [becomes visible by purification]“.
Now, which are the sixty fold factors of purifying process of the Essence of Buddhahood? They are, namely, (1) kinds of ornament of Bodhisattvas, (2) 8 kinds of illumination of Bodhisattvas, (3) 16 kinds of Bodhisattva’s great Compassion, and (4) 32 kinds of Bodhisattva’s deeds.
Immediately after this statement, there is explained the Supreme Enlightenment of the Buddha by indicating the 16 kinds of Great Compassion [imparted by] the Supreme Enlightenment. Next to this description, there is explained the Buddha’s Virtuous Qualities by the indication of 10 Powers, kinds of Intrepidity and 18 Exclusive Properties of the Buddha.And next, the Acts of the Buddha are explained by the indication of 32 kinds of Supreme Acts of the Buddha. Thus, these Vajrapadas should be understood in detail through the indication of their own characters according to the Sūtra.
(The Inherent Connection between Subjects.) And then, what is the inherent connection between these subjects? From the Buddha comes the Doctrine, Owing to the Doctrine there is the Holy community, In the community exist the Matrix, which is The element of Wisdom, aiming at its acquisition; Its acquisition of the Wisdom is the Supreme Enlightenment, Which is endowed with the Qualities, 10 Powers and others, And accompanied by altruistic Acts for all living beings. || 3 || Finished [the explanation of] the relation between each subject in the text.
II. THE JEWEL OF THE BUDDHA
Hereafter we should explain the meaning of Ślokas (basic verses). Those living beings who were lead by the Tathāgata, while taking their refuge in the Tathāgata, also take refuge in the Doctrine and Community through the faith as the natural outflow of the Reality. Therefore, first of all, there is one śloka with regard to the Jewel of The Buddha.
(Kārikā 1) I bow to the one, who has realized the Buddhahood Which has neither beginning, middle nor end, and is quiescent, And who, having realized himself, taught the Path, Fearless and eternal, in order to enlighten the ignorant, And who, having in hand the excellent sword and thunderbolt Of Wisdom and Mercy, cuts in pieces all sprouts of Sufferings, And breaks the wall of doubts concealed In the forest of various views. || 4 ||(§1. The Eightfold Quality of the Buddhahood.) What is shown by this [śloka]? Being immutable, free from efforts And not being dependent upon the others, [Also] Being endowed with Wisdom, Compassion and [supernatural] Power [imparted by both], The Buddhahood has two kinds of benefit. || 5 ||
By this verse there has been briefly explained the Buddhahood as being contracted by eight qualities. Which are the 8 qualities? Namely, 1) Immutability, 2) being free from any effort, 3) Enlightenment, not dependent on others, 4) Wisdom, 5) Compassion, 6) [supernatural] power, 7) fulfilment of self-benefit, and 8) fulfilment of benefit for others.
As having neither beginning, middle nor end by nature, It is immutable; Being the body of quiet character, It is free from any effort, thus remembered by tradition. || 6 ||Being realized by oneself. It is cognizable without any help of others; Thus awakened in a threefold way, it is Wisdom, Because of preaching the way, it is Compassion. || 7 ||It is Power because of destroying Suffering and Defilements by Wisdom and Compassion; By the first three qualities, benefit for oneself, And by the latter three, benefit for others [is indicated]. || 8 ||
1) asaṃskṛta: The word ‘immutable’ should be understood as being opposite to being conditioned or caused. Here ‘being conditioned’ means the thing, of which origination, lasting, as well as destruction are conceivable. Because of the absence of these characteristics, the Buddhahood should be seen as having neither beginning, middle nor end, and being represented as the immutable Absolute Body.2) anābhoga: It is free from efforts because all dualistic views and false discriminations have ceased to exist.3) aparapratyaya_abhisaṃbodhi: It is ‘enlightened without any help of others‘ because it is realized through one’s innate knowledge. Here the word ‘udaya‘ means ‘perfect enlightenment‘, in which the sense’ origination’ is implied. Thus, as being Tathāgata, though it is immutable and of the characteristic of non-activity, the whole action of the Perfectly Enlightened One proceeds without any effort, ceaselessly and uninterruptedly as far as the world exists.
4) Jñāna, 5) karuṇā, & 6) śakti: Thus, not having heard the Buddhahood, which is a quite marvellous and unthinkable sphere, from somebody else, but having perfectly cognized its unutterable nature ‘by one self’, i.e. by means of self-born knowledge which needs no teacher, and, with respect to his comprehension, in order to enlighten the others too, who are ignorant and blind by birth, [the Buddha] has preached the path to follow that [Buddhahood]. Therefore, [the Buddha] should be understood as being endowed with the supreme Wisdom and Compassion.The fearlessness of Path is due to its transcendency. The transcendency is due to its never again being turned back. With respect to their abolition of the roots of others’ Suffering and Defilement, the power of Wisdom and of Compassion of the Tathāgata, is explained by means of the examples of sword and thunderbolt, respectively.Of these, the root of Suffering is, in short, one kind of origination of Individuality on the [three] existences. The root of Defilement is anything which is based on the prejudice to the individual existence, i. e. wrong view and doubt.Here, the Suffering, as being contracted in the Individuality, should be regarded as having the state of sprout because of its character of origination. As having the character of cutting it, it should be known that the Buddha’s power of both Wisdom and Compassion is illustrated by an example of sword.The Defilement, which is contracted in wrong view and doubt and is to be destroyed by the Path of true perception, is difficult to be understood and hardly to be overcome by means of mundane knowledge. Thence, it is akin to the wall concealed by a thick forest. As having the character of breaking, it should be known that Buddha’s Power of both Wisdom and Compassion is illustrated by an example of thunderbolt.
(§2. Reference to the Jñānālokālaṅkāra-Sūtra.) Thus, the six qualities of the Tathāgata mentioned above should be understood by this very order and with detailed and analytical explanation, according to the Sarvabuddhaviṣayāvatārajñānālokālaṃkāra-Sūtra.In that Sūtra, it is said as follows: “O Mañjuśrī, he who is of no origination or destruction is (i.e. has the epithets) the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfectly Enlightened One”. By this, first of all, it is explained that the Tathāgata is of immutable character.And immediately after this, by nine illustrations beginning with the illustration of a reflection of the Indra on the surface of an immaculate Vaiḍūrya stone, with reference to this very meaning of the Tathāgata’s being neither originated nor destructed, it is said as follows:“Thus, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfectly Enlightened One neither moves nor produces any thought, neither explains in a dualistic way nor imagines falsely nor discriminates. He is unimaginable, indiscriminative, devoid of thinking and minding, of quiescent character, of neither origination nor destruction. He cannot be seen, or heard, or smelt, or tested, or touched and has no characteristic remark, has neither making known nor being made known.” and so forth. Such is the explanation of various kinds of aspects of quiescence.By this it is indicated that, in his own acts, all dualistic views and false discriminations have ceased to exist; hence, the Tathāgata is free from efforts. After this, i.e. after the explanation of [nine] illustrations, there is explained by the remaining texts the Tathāgata’s perfect enlightenment realized without any help of others with respect to all the gates to the Perfect Enlightenment of the real nature of all elements.And after this, with reference to the Tathāgata’s 16 kinds of Enlightenment, it is said as follows: “There, O Mañjuśrī, as soon as the Tathāgata has enlightened all the elements of such a nature and has observed the Essential nature of all living beings as ‘impure‘ ‘not removing stains‘ and ‘blemished‘, the Great Compassion named ‘mastery’ sets in forth on all living beings”.By this the Tathāgata’s pośession of Supreme Wisdom and Compassion is demonstrated. There, “all the elements of such a nature” means ‘[all the elements, having the nature] as has been said before’, i.e. the character of non-existence. “Having enlightened” means ‘having known truly by means of Buddha’s non-discriminative Wisdom’.“Of [all] living beings” means ‘of those [living beings] who are in the state of conformed [in right way], unconformed and wrongly conformed groups’. “Essential nature” means ‘the Matrix of the Tathāgata, which is not different from his own quality by nature’“Having observed” means ‘having perceived all kinds (i.e. impure, etc.) through the Buddha’s eye to which nothing is obscure’. “Impure” means ‘[impure nature] of the ignorant and common people’ because of obstruction caused by Moral Defilement.“Not removing stains” means ‘[stainful nature] of the Śravakas and Pratyekabuddhas’ because of obstruction on account of knowable things. “Blemished” means ‘[blemished nature] of Bodhisattvas’, because of [their] retaining [the impression of] one of both [obstructions]. [The Compassion is “named] mastery” because it enters well into the gates of accomplished means of training in various ways.“The great Compassion sets forth on all living beings”, because [the Buddha], having realized the characteristics of all living beings through equality, has the intention to lead [the living beings] to the acquisition of their own nature.After this, i.e. having aroused the supreme Wisdom and Compassion, [the Buddha] has no relaxation of activity for effectuating the setting in motion of the Wheel of unparalleled Doctrine. This [activity] should be known as ‘power’ of both [Wisdom and Compassion] in regard of acting for the sake of others.7) Sva_arthasaṃpad & 8) para_arthasaṃpad: Here, of these six qualities of the Tathāgata, according to order [the quality] connected with the first three qualities, immutable, etc. is ‘the fulfilment of self-benefit’, and [the quality connected with] the remaining three, Wisdom, etc. is ‘the fulfilment of benefit for others’.Besides [there is another meaning]. By the word ‘Wisdom’, the fulfilment of self-benefit is designated, in so far as the highest, eternal and quiescent place has the character of being the basis of his own perfect enlightenment. By the words ‘Compassion’ and ‘Power’, the fulfilment of benefit for others is designated, because of their character of being the basis for setting forth the Wheel of the highest and greatest Doctrine.
III. THE JEWEL OF THE DOCTRINE
Now, from the Jewel of the Buddha, there arises the Jewel of the Doctrine. Therefore, immediately after [the explanation of] the former, we have one śloka concerning the latter.
(Kārikā 2). I bow before the sun of the Doctrine, Which is neither non-being nor being, Nor both being and non-being together, And neither different from being nor from non-being; Which cannot be speculated upon and is beyond explanation, But revealed [only] by introspection 2> and is quiescent; And which, with rays of light of the immaculate Wisdom, Destroys passion, hatred and darkness with respect to all the basis of cognition. || 9 ||
(§1. Eightfold Quality of the Doctrine.) What is shown by this śloka? Because of its being unthinkable, non-dual, and being non-discriminative, And because of its pureness, manifestation and hostility; The Doctrine, which is Deliverance and also by which arises Deliverance Has the characteristics of the two Truths. || 10 ||
By this verse, in brief, the Jewel of the Doctrine is explained as being contracted by eight qualities. Which are the eight qualities? They are 1) unthinkability, 2) non-duality, 3) non-discriminativeness, 4) purity, 5) [being] manifest, 6) hostility [against obstacles], 7) Deliverance [from passions], and 8) cause of Deliverance.
(§2. Nirodha-satya and Mārga-satya.) Deliverance is summarized In both truths, Extinction and Path, Which are each to be known By three qualities according to order. || 11 ||
Of these six qualities, by the first three qualities, i.e. unthinkability, non-duality and non-discriminativeness, the Truth of Extinction is explained. From this [explanation] it should be known that the Deliverance [itself] is contracted. And by the remaining three qualities, i.e. purity, manifestation and hostility, the Truth of Path is explained, and from this, it should be known that the cause of Deliverance is contracted.“That which is Deliverance” means [the Doctrine, as] the Truth of Extinction, and “by which arises the Deliverance” means ‘by [the Doctrine as] the Truth of Path.’ Having joined these two together, it is explained, ‘being of the nature of Deliverance’ means ‘having characteristic of the two purifying Truths’.
(§3. The Doctrine as the Truth of Extinction.) Because of its being beyond speculation and explanation, And because of its being the knowledge of Saints, Unthinkability [of the Doctrine should be known]; Because of quiescence it is non-dual and non-discriminative, And three [qualities], purity etc., are akin to the sun. || 12 ||
1) acintyatva: Unthinkability of the Truth of Extinction, in short, should be known by three causes. By which three? Because, 1) it is not a sphere of speculation even by four categories [of existence], i.e. non-being, being, being and non-being together, and neither being nor non-being; 2) it cannot be explained by any sound, voice, speech, way of speech, explanation, agreed term, designation, conversation [and so forth]; and 3) it is to be revealed by the introspection of Saints.
2) advayatā & 3) nirvikalpatā. How should here be understood non-duality and non-discriminativeness of the Truth of Extinction? It is taught by the Lord as follows: “O Śāriputra, quiescent is this Absolute Body [of the Buddha], having the nature of being non-dual and non-discriminative”.Here, ‘dual’ means ‘action’ or ‘active force’, [as by deed, word and thought] and ‘Defilement’; ‘discrimination’ means ‘Irrational Thought’ which is the cause of origination of Action and Defilements. By knowing deeply that this Irrational thought is extinct by nature, consequently, there is no origination of duality and discrimination; for this reason there is absolutely no origination of Suffering. This is called the Truth of Extinction of Suffering. It should never be explained that, because of extinction of something, it is [called] the Truth of Extinction of Suffering. It is said as follows:“O Mañjuśrī, in case there is neither origination nor extinction, mental actions as mind, intellect and consciousness never take place. Wherever no mental action takes place, there is no false imagination by which they would think irrationally.One who applies himself with rational thought never makes Ignorance arise. Non-arising of Ignorance means non-arising of the Twelve Parts of Existence. It is called ‘non-birth’, and so forth”.Also said [in the scripture]. “O Lord, extinction of Suffering does not mean the disappearance of element. By the term, ‘Extinction of Suffering’, O Lord, there is designated the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata which is beginningless, immutable, of no birth, non-originated, of no destruction, free from destruction, eternal, constant, quiescent, everlasting, purified by nature, released from covering of all moral defilements, and endowed with inseparable and unthinkable qualities of the Buddha, which are far more than the sands of the Ganga in number. And this very Absolute Body of the Tathāgata, O Lord, [when it is] unreleased from the covering of moral defilements, is called the Matrix of Tathāgata.”Thus all the determination of the Truth of Extinction of Suffering should be understood wholly and in detail according to Sūtras.
(§4. The Doctrine as the Truth of Path.) 4) śuddhi, 5) abhivyaktikaraṇa & 6) pratipakṣatā: Now indeed, the way to attain the Absolute Body of Tathāgata named Extinction of Suffering is the Path of perception and practice based upon the non discriminative Wisdom. And this [Path] is to be known as similar to the sun with threefold common characteristics.[Namely] 1) through the common characteristic of purity of the disk, because of being apart from all the minor defilements and stains; 2) through the common characteristic of being the manifestor of forms, because of making manifest knowable things of all kinds; and 3) through the common characteristic of hostility against darkness, because of being the enemy of all kinds of obstacles against the true perception.
And ‘bondage’ means the origination of Desire, Hatred and Ignorance preceded by the thought which takes its basis [of cognition] upon the characteristic of unreal things. It is due to the union of the state of tendency with manifested state [of defilement].Indeed, people regard the unreal, i.e., ‘not of its nature’ thing as the [real] characteristic because of its desirable looks when Desire comes forth from its state of tendency; when Hatred comes forth [from its state of tendency], [they regard the unreal thing as the real characteristic] because of its detestable looks; and when Ignorance comes forth, then it is the same because of its obscure looks.And of those people who incorrectly take hold of characteristics of Desire, Hatred and Ignorance as the basis of cognition, the Irrational Thought occupies their mind. For those people whose mind is occupied with the Irrational Thought, there takes place the Defilement of any one of Desire, Hatred and Ignorance.Due to this [origination of Defilement], they make the actions born of Desire by means of body, speech and thought, and also [in the same way] they produce the action born of Hatred, the action born of Ignorance. Furthermore, from Action there results Rebirth.Thus these people, having tendencies [of Desire, Hatred and Ignorance], regarding the [unreal] characteristic [as real], and making it the basis of cognition, [affectionally] hanging on it, produce the Irrational Thought, from which consequently arises Defilement. Because of origination of Defilement, there arises Action; from the origination of Action, there arises Rebirth. And all kinds of impurity of these Defilements, Action, Rebirth, etc. come forth because people do not know, nor perceive the one [real] Essence as it is.
[On the other hand] these impurities should be seen in the same manner as by a perfect investigator who does not perceive any [unreal] characteristic nor any basis of these impurities. [Because], when he perceives neither characteristic nor basis, then can he perceive the Reality. Thus, these elements are perfectly realized by the Tathāgata as equal through equality.And thus, this realization of all natures by Wisdom, as being equal without any addition nor diminution because of these two facts, i.e. because we cannot see any characteristic nor basis of non-being, and we can see the real character of being as the absolute truth, this is to be known as the ‘enemy’ of all kinds of obstacles against the true perception.And because of the origination of this enemy, there is absolutely no aśociation nor harmony of the obstacles. This is indeed the Path of perception and practice based upon the non-discriminative Wisdom, which is the cause of attaining the Absolute Body [of the Tathāgata] and which is to be understood in detail according to the Sūtra named Prajnāpāramitā.
IV. THE JEWEL OF THE COMMUNITY
Now, from the Jewel of the Doctrine of the Great Vehicle, there arises the Jewel of the Community of Bodhisattvas who are abiding in the irreversible state. Therefore, immediately after [the explanation of] the former, we have one śloka referring to the latter.
(Kārikā 3) I bow before those who, having understood perfectly The extremity of non-substantiality of all the worlds as quiescent, Because of their perception of the unreality of defilements Through the brightness of the innate pure mind of all the world, Perceive the Buddhahood penetrating everywhere; Those whose intellect is unobscured, And whose eye of Wisdom has its objects In the pureness and infinitude of the living beings. || 13 ||(§1. Manner and Extent of the Perception of the Community.) What is shown by this śloka? Because of its purity of perception by introspective knowledge, So far as its manner and extent are concerned, The Community of irreversible Bodhisattvas [Is endowed] with the supreme qualities. || 14 ||
By this it is explained, in brief, that the Jewel of the Community of irreversible Bodhisattvas is endowed with supreme qualities, because of its purity of perception by supermundane knowledge, with respect to two aspects, [manner and extent] i.e. ‘being as it is’ and ‘being as far as’.
(a. Right Manner of Perception.) Their manner [of perception] is ‘as it is’, Because they have understood the quiescent nature of the world, And this [understanding] is caused by The purity [of the innate mind] and Their perception of the defilement as being destroyed from the outset. || 15 ||
Here, ‘being as it is’ should be understood thus: because, [with respect to the manner], they (i.e. Bodhisattvas) have understood the extremity of non-substantiality of the whole world called Individualities and Separate Elements as it is. And this understanding, relating to the non-annihilation of Individualities and Separate Elements because of their nature of absolute quiescence from the outset, is produced, in short, by two causes. Namely, because of their perception of the innate brightness of the mind, and because of their perception of being destroyed from the outset’, i.e. the extinction of defilements on the mind.Here, these two, i.e. the innate brightness of the mind and the defilement on the mind, are quite difficult to be understood in relation to the fact that, in the immaculate sphere, there is no succession of a second mind because both minds, good and bad, act together as one and the same.Therefore, it is said: “O Lord, a good mind is momentary; it cannot be afflicted by defilements. The bad mind is [also] momentary; even this [bad] mind cannot be afflicted by defilements. O Lord, defilements cannot touch that mind. [And the mind cannot be touched by the Defilements]. O Lord, how is it pośible that the mind, of untouchable character, can be afflicted by darkness? O Lord, still there is defilement and there is defiled mind. Moreover, O Lord, the meaning that the mind purified by nature is defiled is difficult to be understood”.Thus, with reference to [the manner of] ‘being as it is’, the explanation of the meaning ‘difficult to be understood’ should be understood in detail according to the Sūtra.
(b. Unlimited Extent of Perception.) Their extent [of perception] is ‘as far as’, Because they perceive the existence Of the nature of Omniscience in all living beings, By the intellect reaching as far as the limit of the knowable. || 16 ||Here, ‘being as far as’ should be understood thus: because [with respect to the extent], they perceive the existence of the Matrix of the Tathāgata in all living beings, up to those who are in the animal kingdom, by means of the supermundane intellect which reaches as far as the limit of all knowable things. And this perception of Bodhisattvas takes place in the first Stage of the Bodhisattva, because [verily in that Stage], the Absolute Essence is realized in the sense of all-pervading.
(§2. Introspective Character of Bodhisattva‘s Perception.) Thus, what is called ‘understanding in such a way’, That is the perception by one‘s own wisdom. It is pure in the Immaculate Sphere, Because it is free from attachment and has no hindrance. || 17 ||
‘Thus, in such a way’, by this way, i.e. through ‘being as it is’ and ‘being as far as’; what is called ‘understanding’ of the supermundane path, is here intended to be the perception of the Saints by the supermundane wisdom of their own, i.e. uncommon to others.And this [perception] is called perfectly pure in comparison with the superficial knowledge of everyday life because, in brief, of two reasons. Which ones? Because it is ‘free from any attachment’, and because it ‘has no hindrance’. Here, as its field is the innate purity of the Essence of living beings through its being as it is, the perception [of the Saints] is free from any attachment; and through its being as far as, its field is the unlimited number of knowable objects, therefore, that perception has no hindrance.
(§3. Superiority of Bodhisattva’s Community) Through the purity of their perception by wisdom, It is superior as [being the same as] Buddha’s Wisdom. Therefore, the Saints abiding in the irreversible state Are [worthy of being] the refuge of all living beings. || 18 ||
Thus, this ‘purity of perception by wisdom’ of Bodhisattvas who mounted to the Stage of being irreversible is to be known as ‘the supreme’, because it approached the highest purity of the perception of Buddha‘s Wisdom; or otherwise, because it is superior to the other qualities of Bodhisattva, donation, moral conduct, etc. On account of this purity, it is said that Bodhisattvas in the irreversible state are worthy of being the refuge of all living beings.There is no mention of the Jewel of Community of the Śrāvakas, immediately after the Jewel of Community of the Bodhisattvas, because the former is not worthy of being worshipped.Indeed, there is no wise man who, having known the distinction of qualities between Bodhisattvas and Śrāvakas, casting off the new-moon-like Bodhisattvas, who have the lustre-disk of Wisdom and Compassion filling with great accumulation of merits and knowledge for the Great Enlightenment, and are standing in the illumination over the group existence of innumerable living beings and entering the way favourable for going toward the full-moon of the supreme Tathāgata, tries to bow before the Śravakas, who in their turn, although having attained certain limited superficial knowledge, are standing in the illumination for their own existence like stars.Indeed, even those Bodhisattvas who have resolved to attain the Enlightenment for the first time by the quality based upon the purity of altruistic intention, can overcome the holy Śrāvakas who are pitiless, indifferent to the nourishment of others, although having attained perfect purity of immaculate moral conduct and discipline. How much more is the case of the other qualities of Bodhisattvas, 10 Controlling Powers, etc.? Really, it will be said:One who feeds moral conduct for his own sake, Apart from Compassion on the living beings of bad conduct, And who is endowed with pure wealth of moral conduct only for his own nourishment, Such a saint is never called a man of pure conduct. One who, having aroused the highest Compassion toward others And having accepted the moral conduct, Renders services for others’ livelihood like fire, wind, water and earth, Such a one is a [real] moral man, and others are of sham morality.
V. THE THREE JEWELS AS REFUGES
Now, for what purpose and for the sake of whom did the Lord teach the Refuges?
In order to show [the virtues of] The Teacher, the Teaching and Disciples, With reference to those who belong to Vehicles And to those who devote themselves to religious observance Three Refuges were taught‘) [by the Lord]. || 19 ||
(§1. Refuges from the Empirical Standpoint.) The teaching: “the Buddha is a Refuge because he is the highest among human beings”; it was established, in order to show the virtue of the Teacher, for the sake of those people who approached the nature of Buddha i.e. who belong to the Vehicle of Bodhisattva and those [people who] devote themselves to the highest religious observance of the Buddha.The teaching: “the Doctrine is a Refuge because it is the highest of what are devoid of passions”; it was established, in order to show the virtue of the Teaching of the Teacher, for the sake of those people who approach the enlightenment of profound Doctrine of the dependent origination by [depending on] themselves, i.e. who belong to the Vehicle of the Pratyekabuddha and those who are devotees to the highest religious observance of the Doctrine.The teaching: “the Community [of the disciples] is a Refuge because it is the highest of communities”; it was established, in order to show the virtue of Disciples well enrolled in the Teaching of the Teacher, for the sake of those people who approach in order to understand the voice heard from others, i.e. who belong to the Vehicle of Śrāvaka, and those who are devotees to the highest religious observance in the Community.Thus, in short, for these three purposes, for the sake of six kinds of people, distinctively did the Lord establish the teaching of these three Refuges from the empirical standpoint, in order to make living beings enter the regular method.
(§2. The Doctrine and Community are not the Ultimate Refuges.) As being abandoned, being of deceptive nature, Being non-existence and being possessed of fear, [respectively], The two kinds of Doctrine and the Community Are ultimately not the highest Refuge. || 20 ||
The Doctrine has two kinds, i.e. the Doctrine as Teaching and the Doctrine as Realization. Of them, the Doctrine as Teaching is [the Doctrine] of Sūtra and other teachings and it consists of the collection of name, word, and letter. And it is said that this Teaching is akin to the boat because it ends with the acquisition of the Path.The Doctrine as Realization is [again] twofold by the division of cause and result. That is to say, the Truth of Path and the Truth of Extinction in the sense, ‘by which realized’ and ‘that which in realized’, [respectively]. Of them, the Path is included in the artificial character. That which is included in the artificial character is of false, deceptive nature. That which is of false, deceptive nature is untrue, that which is untrue is not eternal, and that which is non-eternal cannot be a refuge.And the Extinction realized by this Path also represents, according to the system of Śrāvaka, the mere absence of Defilement and Suffering, just like the extinction of a lamp. Also, a non-existence cannot be a refuge nor a non-refuge.‘The Community’ is a term for the community [of the Saints] belonging to three Vehicles. And they are always possessed of fear, because, as learned people, they have taken refuge in the Tathāgata and are seeking for deliverance; [but still] they have [many] things to be done and are approaching (i.e. have not yet realized) the Highest Perfect Enlightenment.How are they possessed of fear? As the Arhats (the Saints of the Vehicle of Śrāvaka), though having extirpated rebirth, have not yet destroyed the Impression [of Defilements], there therefore exists always and constantly a strong notion of fear in all physical life, as if standing in face of the executioner with raised sword. So they have not attained the ultimate delightful Deliverance.Indeed, [that which is] a refuge [by itself] never seeks for refuges [in others]. Just as living beings, having no refuge, are frightened by this or that fear, and consequently seek for the Deliverance, similarly even the Arhats have their fear, and, being frightened by fear they take refuge in the Tathāgata. And thus one who seeks for a refuge because of his being possessed of fear, will inevitably seek for the deliverance from fear.And as being a seeker of deliverance, with reference to the destruction of the root of fear, a learned man is ‘one who has things to be done’. As being a learned man, he is ‘one who has undertaken’ to attain the fearless, highest state, i.e. the Highest Perfect Enlightenment. For this reason, the Community, being a partial refuge, cannot be the ultimate refuge. Thus these two Refuges, (i.e. the Doctrine and the Community), are called ‘temporary refuges’.
(§3. Only the Buddha is the Refuge from the Highest Standpoint.) From the ultimate standpoint, Buddhahood is the sole Refuge of the world, Because the Sage has the body of the Doctrine, And because in that the Community sets the ultimate goal. || 21 ||
As has been said before, the Sage, represented as neither becoming originated nor disappearing, is endowed with the body of the Doctrine, liberated from passions and [characterized] as the Two Truths of purification (i.e. the Truth of Path and the Truth of Extinction), and in the purity of this Body of the Doctrine (= the Absolute Body, dharmakāya), the Community [of the Saints] belonging to the three Vehicles sets the ultimate goal of acquisition.Therefore, from the ultimate standpoint, that which is the imperishable Refuge, eternal Refuge, and everlasting Refuge, which lasts as long as the utmost limit in the unprotected and refugeless world, is [only one], that is to say, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfectly Enlightened one. And this teaching of the unique, eternal, ever-lasting, quiescent and unchangeable Refuge is to be understood in detail according to the Āryaśrīmālā-Sūtra.
(§4. The Meaning of the ‘Jewels’.) [They are called] ‘Jewels’, because Their appearance is difficult to obtain, They are immaculate and powerful, And because of their being the ornament of the world, And being the highest and unchangeable. || 22 ||
In short, by the sixfold common nature with Jewels, these three named Buddha, Doctrine and Community, are called ‘Jewel’. That is to say, 1) through the common nature of their appearance being difficult to obtain; because those people who have not ripened the root of virtue cannot get any chance to meet them, even during a long succession of aeons.2) Through the common nature of being immaculate; because they are apart from all kinds of dust. 3) Through the common nature of power; because they are endowed with the quality of unthinkable power, the Supernatural Powers and so forth. 4) Through the common nature of being the ornament of the world; because they are the cause of beauty intended by the whole world.5) Through the common nature of being superior to the artificial jewel; because they are supermundane. And 6) through the common nature of being unchangeable by praise, blame etc.; because of their non-artificial nature.
VI. THE GERM OF THREE JEWELS IN FOUR ASPECTS
Immediately after the explanation of the Three Jewels, there is one śloka with reference to the question, in what circumstances are there born the Three Jewels, what is the birth-place of purity, mundane and supermundane.
(Kārikā 4) The Reality mingled with pollution, And [the Reality] apart from pollution, The Immaculate Qualities of the Buddha, and his Acts; [These are the four aspects of] the sphere Of those who perceive the Highest Truth, From which arise the pure Three Jewels. || 23 ||
What is elucidated by this śloka ? The Germ of these Three Jewels Is the sphere of the Omniscience, And it is inconceivable in fourfold For four reasons, respectively. || 24 ||Here, 1) ‘The Reality mingled with pollution’ is a term for ‘the Essence, unreleased from the sheath of defilements’, i.e. the Matrix of Tathāgata. 2) ‘The Reality apart from pollution’ is a term for the same Essence, when it is characterized as the Perfect Manifestation of Basis in the Stage of Buddha, i.e. the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata. 3) ‘Immaculate Qualities of the Buddha’ means Supermundane Qualities of the Buddha 10 Powers and so on in this Absolute Body of the Tathāgata, characterized as the Perfect Manifestation of Basis. 4)‘The Buddha‘s Act’ means the automatic, highest act of these Qualities of the Buddha, 10 Powers, etc., which continues to give prophecies to Bodhisattvas, without end, without interruption, unceasingly. And also, these four subjects are inconceivable for four reasons, respectively; therefore, they are called the Sphere of Omniscience Then, for which four reasons ?
(§1. Inconceivability of the Subjects.) Because, [the Germ is] pure but defiled [at one and the same time], [The Absolute Body is] of no impurity, and yet purified, [The Qualities are] of inseparable nature [from the Absolute Body], and [The Acts are] effortless and of no discrimination. || 25 ||
Here, 1) ‘the Reality mingled with pollution’ is always, at the same time, pure and defiled; this point is inconceivable. [Here, ‘inconceivable’ is] in the sense that even for the Pratyekabuddhas who believe in the way of profound Doctrine, this is not an understandable sphere. Because it is said:“O Goddess, these two points are quite difficult to be cognized. It is difficult to be cognized that the mind is pure by nature. It is also difficult to be cognized that this very mind is defiled. O Goddess, those who can hear these two points [with understanding] are only either yourself or Bodhisattvas who are endowed with the great qualities. O Goddess, for the other Śrāvakas and Pratyekabuddhas, these two points are to be understood only through the faith in the Tathāgata”.2) ‘The Reality apart from pollution’, though it is originally not defiled by pollution, yet it is purified afterwards; this point is inconceivableable. Because it is said: “The mind is clear by nature. This is the real knowledge as it is. Therefore it is said: [the Tathāgata] perfectly enlightened the Supreme Perfect Enlightenment by the Intellect endowed with contemplation at one moment”.Next, ‘Immaculate Qualities of the Buddha’ are always found even in the stage of those ordinary people who are absolutely defiled, of no differentiation through the inseparable nature [from the Absolute Body]; this point is inconceivable. Because it is said:“There is no one among the group of living beings in whose body the Wisdom of the Tathāgata does not penetrate at all. Nevertheless, as taking [wrong] conceptions, he cannot cognize the Buddha’s Wisdom [residing in himself]. By removing this taking of conceptions, the Wisdom of Omniscience, self-born Wisdom, makes its appearance again unobstructedly.O Son of the Buddha, suppose there would be a big painting cloth, of the size equal to the Great 3-thousand thousands of Worlds. And indeed, on this big cloth, the whole Great 3-thousand thousands of Worlds would be described completely. The Great Earth would be described in the exact size of the Great Earth. The 2-thousand Worlds [would be written] in their own full size.[In the same way] the thousands of Worlds, the Four Continents, the Great Ocean, the Southern Continent of Jambū, the Eastern Continent of Videha, the [Western] Continent of Godāvarī, the Northern Continent of Kuru, the Mount Sumeru, the Palace of Gods living on the earth, that of Gods living in the Sphere of Desire, and of Gods living in the Sphere of Form; all of these would be written in their own size.And [thus] this big cloth would have the same size as the expansion of the Great 3-thousand thousands of Worlds. Furthermore, this very big cloth would enter within one particle of an atom. Just as this big cloth lies within one small particle of an atom, in the same way, in each of all the other particles of atoms, too, there enters a big cloth of the same size.Suppose there should appear one person, well learned, clever, intelligent, wise and possessed of the skill to approach there i.e. to the big cloth. And his divine eyes were perfectly pure and clear. With these divine eyes he would perceive [and say]: Why does this big cloth of such a great nature stay here in such a limited small particle of an atom! It is of no use to anybody!So he would think: “Now, I will break this particle of an atom by the force of great efforts and let this great cloth become useful for the world. Then, producing the strength of great efforts, he would break this small particle of an atom with a subtle diamond and would make that great cloth useful for the world as was his intention. Not only for one particle of an atom but also for [all] the remaining atoms, he would act in the same way.Similarly, O Son of the Buddha, the Wisdom of the Tathāgata, which is the immeasurable wisdom, the profitable wisdom for all living beings, thoroughly penetrates within the mentality of every living being. And every mental disposition of a living being has the same size as the Buddha’s Wisdom. Only the ignorant, however, being bound by misconceptions does neither know nor cognize nor understand nor realize the Wisdom of the Tathāgata [within himself].Therefore, the Tathāgata, having observed the state of all the living beings in all the universal region by his unobstructed Wisdom, resolves to be a teacher [and says:] ‘What a pity! These living beings cannot cognize properly the Wisdom of the Tathāgata, though it penetrates them. O ! I shall try to withdraw all the obstacles made by wrong conceptions for the sake of these living beings through the teaching of [8-fold] Holy Path, in order that they would by themselves, by accepting the power of the Holy Path, cast off the big knot of conceptions and would recognize the Wisdom of the Tathāgata [within themselves], also that they would obtain equality with the Tathāgata’.[In accordance with this declaration], they remove all the obstacles made by wrong conceptions through the teaching of the [Holy] Path of the Tathāgata. And when all the obstacles created by wrong conceptions are withdrawn, then this immeasurable Wisdom of the Tathāgata becomes useful to all the world”.Now, ‘the Buddha’s Acts’ proceed forth at one time, everywhere, always, without efforts, without discrimination, according to the intention [of the living beings], according to [the faculty of] the living beings who are to be disciplined without fault, in conformance with their merits, this point is inconceivable. Because it is said:“In order to enroll the living beings [in the Buddha’s Doctrine] the Acts of Tathāgata, though they are unlimited, are taught as if they were somewhat limited, with summarized numbers.However, O Noble Youth, that which is the true act of the Tathāgata is immeasurable, inconceivable, uncognizable by all the world, indescribable by letters, difficult to be acquired by others, established in all Buddhas’ lands, rendered in equality with all the Buddhas, far beyond all works of exertion, of no discrimination as being equal to the sky, of no differentiation as being the act of the universal Essence “ &c.Then, after showing the example of pure, precious Vaidūrya stone, it is taught as follows:“O noble youth, in this manner, this Buddha’s inconceivable Act should be known as rendered in equality [with all the Buddhas], nowhere blamable, related to the three divisions of time, and not interrupting the lineage of the Jewels.Residing in this inconceivable Act of the Tathāgata, the Buddha never casts off the sky-like nature of his body and be shows himself in all the Buddhas’ lands; without casting off the indescribable nature of his speech, he teaches the Doctrine for the sake of living beings through the proper word-communication; and being apart from all objects of the mind, still he can understand the deeds and intentions of the minds of all living beings.
(§2. The Germ as Cause and Conditions of the Jewels in its four Aspects.) The object to be enlightened, the Enlightenment, The attributes of the enlightenment, The act to instruct the enlightenment ; [Of these four], respectively, One subject signifies the cause, [The remaining] three are the conditions For the purification of the former. || 26 ||
Indeed, of these four subjects, with reference to their inclusion of all knowable objects, the first subject should be known as ‘the object to be enlightened’. The second subject, ‘the Enlightenment’ should be known in the sense that the object to be enlightened has been awakened, therefore it is the Enlightenment. Being the portions of enlightenment, they are called Buddha’s attribute; in this sense the third subject, ‘the attributes of the Enlightenment’ is to be known.Only through the attributes of Enlightenment is there instruction for others; in this sense the fourth subject, ‘the act to instruct the Enlightenment’ is to be known. Thus with reference to these four subjects, the arrangement of the Germ of the Jewels in the state of cause and conditions is to be known.Here, of these four subjects, the first one, as being the seed of the supermundane things, should be understood as the cause of origination of the Jewels with reference to its (= of the Germ) purification based upon ‘each own’ correct thinking. Thus “one subject signifies the cause”. How are there three conditions?The Tathāgata, having realized the Supreme Perfect Enlightenment, manifests the Act of Tathāgata of features, being endowed with the Virtuous Qualities of the Buddha, Powers, etc. This is to be understood as the condition for the origination of the Jewels with reference to the purification of Germ based upon the voice of others. Thus “[the remaining] three are the condition”. Hereafter, of these four subjects, a detailed and analytical explanation will be made known in the remaining chapters.
VII. THE SERMON: ALL LIVING BEINGS ARE POSSESSED OF THE MATRIX OF THE TATHĀGATA.
Now, with reference to ‘the Reality mingled with pollution’, it is said: All living beings are possessed of the Matrix of the Tathāgata. By which meaning is it said thus?
(Kārikā 5) The multidudes of living beings are included in the Buddha’s Wisdom, Their immaculateness is non-dual by nature, Its result manifests itself on the Germ of the Buddha; Therefore, it is said: all living beings are possessed of the Matrix of the Buddha. || 27 ||[What is shown by this śloka?] The Buddha’s Body penetrates everywhere, Reality is of undifferentiated nature, And the Germ [of the Buddha] exists [in the living beings]. Therefore, all living beings are always possessed of the Matrix of the Buddha. || 28 ||
In short, by three kinds of meaning, it is said by the Lord that all living beings are always possessed of the Matrix of Tathāgata. That is to say, by the following three meanings: the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata penetrates all living beings; the Tathāgata being the Reality, is the undifferentiated whole; and there exists the Germ of the Tathāgata [in every living being]. And of these three subjects, the [detailed] explanation will be made below according to the Tathāgatagarbha-sūtra. Prior to it, however, there is [another] meaning by which this meaning in all its aspects is indicated in the Scripture with no variance anywhere. With reference to that as well, I shall now explain.
VIII. ANALYSIS OF THE GERM FROM 10 POINTS OF VIEW
Summary: The own nature and the cause, The result, function, union and manifestation, Various states and all-pervadingness, The qualities always unchangeable and non-differential In these [points of view], there should be known The implication of the Absolute Essence. || 29 ||
In short, with reference to these 10 meanings, there should be understood the various aspects of the Essence of the Tathāgata, which is the sphere of the highest true knowledge. What are the meanings ? They are namely: the own nature [of the Germ]; the cause; the result [of its purification]; the function [towards the purification]; the union [of the Germ]; the manifestation [of the Germ]; the various states [of its manifestation]; all-pervadingness [of the Germ]; unchangeability [of the Germ through various states]; and non-differentiation [of the Germ with the Reality].
(I. SVABHĀVA & II. HETU) Now, with reference to the meaning of ‘own nature’and ‘cause’ there is one śloka. (Kārikā 6) [The Matrix of the Tathāgata] is always undefiled by nature, Like the pure jewel, the sky and water; It follows after the faith in the Doctrine, The highest Intellect, Meditation and Compassion. || 30 ||(§1. The Nature of the Essence of the Tathāgata.) Here, what is shown by the former half of this śloka? Because of its own nature of power, Identity, and being moist; in these [three points] [The Essence of the Tathāgata has] a resemblance To the quality of the wish-fulfilling jewel, the sky and water. || 31 ||
‘In these’ three [points], which are already mentioned above, the resemblance of the Essence of the Tathāgata to the purified quality of the wish-fulfilling jewel, the sky and water, respectively, should be known with reference to its particular and common characteristics.Now, first of all, a resemblance to the wish-fulfilling jewel is to be known of the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata, with reference to its particular characteristic, the own nature of powers, fulfillment of desired objects etc.A resemblance to the sky is to be known of the Reality, with reference to its own nature of identity [everywhere] as the particular characteristic. A resemblance to water is to be known of the Germ of the Tathāgata, with reference to its moist nature of mercy towards living beings as the particular characteristic.And now, of all these, with reference to their being undefiled always, absolutely, by nature, i.e., the innate purity as the common characteristic, this very resemblance [of the Essence] to the purified qualities of wish-fulfilling jewel, the sky and water is to be understood.
(§2. Obstructions and Causes of Purification). Now, what is shown by the latter half of the śloka (v. 30)? There are four kinds of Obstructions Enmity to the Doctrine and perception of the Self, Fear of Suffering in this world, And indifference to the profit of living beings ; || 32 ||[These are respectively] of the Icchantikas, Of the Heretics, the Śrāvakas and the Pratyekabuddhas ; The virtues, the faith [in the Doctrine] etc., are The four Causes of purification. || 33 ||
In brief there are those three kinds of living beings among their multitudes: 1) those who cling to the worldly life, 2) those who seek for deliverance from it, 3) those who wish neither of both.Of them, 1) those who cling to the worldly life should be known as twofold. a) The people whose intention is against the path to Emancipation and who never belong to the family of the perfect Nirvāṇa, Those are only seeking for Phenomenal Life and not for Nirvāṇa. And b) Those people who, although belonging to this Our Religion, have definitely fallen into the former’s way. Some of these are hostile to the Doctrine of the Great Vehicle. With reference to them, the Lord said as follows:“I am not their teacher; they are not my pupils. O Śāriputra, I say of them that they are chiefly filled with darkness, as migrating from darkness to another darkness, from gloom to greater gloom”.Next, 2) ‘those who seek for deliverance from this worldly life’ are also twofold. a) Those who have fallen into a methodless way and b) ‘those who are in [the correct] method’. Here, ‘those who are of no method’ are again divided into three. i) Outsiders of this Religion, i.e. various kinds of Heretics, i.e. the Carakas, the Parivrājakas i, the Jains, etc.ii) & iii) Insiders of Our Religion, but whose conduct is in common with the Heretics. They, though being faithful in [Buddhism], take hold of bad conceptions. Then, what are they ? They are namely, ii) those who have the perception of the substantial Ego and have no faith in the Highest Truth. With reference to them, the Lord said :“One who has no faith in Non-substantiality is not different from the Heretics”.iii) Those who have the conception of the Non-substantiality and are proud of it are doubtless at the door of Emancipation through the Non-substantiality in this religion. But as they are intoxicated with this Non-substantiality, it follows for them that Non-substantiality itself becomes a [wrong] conception. With reference to these, he (= the Lord) said [in the Scripture]: “O Kaśyapa, really even such a conception which maintains substantial Ego as much as Mt. Sumeru is better than the conception of Non-substantiality on the part of those who are proud of it”.Here, b ‘those who are in [the correct] method’ are again twofold. i) Those who belong to the Vehicle of the Śrāvaka and ii) those who belong to the Vehicle of the Pratyekabuddha. [Both of them] have proceeded on the fixed way of rightfulness.And next, 3) ‘those who wish neither of both the worldly life and deliverance from it’ are the people who are standing firmly amidst the Great Vehicle and are of the highest, talented faculty. They are not seeking for the Phenomenal Life as the Icchantikas do, nor are they those who are in no method like Heretics, nor those who are in the correct method [for deliverance] like Śrāvakas and Pratyekabuddhas,but, having entered the Path to obtain [the intuition of] the equality of this Phenomenal Life with Nirvāṇa, they intend not to stay fixedly in the Nirvāṇa; their activities are based upon Phenomenal Life but without being defiled by it, and their root is perfectly pure as being grounded in the firm Compassion and Superior IntentionAnd here, 1) those people who cling to this wordly life, i.e. the Icchantikas and those who, though belonging to this Our Religion, have definitely fallen into the former’s way are called (A) the group of people who conform in the wrong way.2-a) ‘Those people who seek for deliverance from the worldly life but have no method’ are called (B) the group of people unconformed. 2-b) ‘Those people who seek for deliverance with the correct method’ and 3) ‘those who wish neither of both’ and have entered the path through which [the intuition of] the equality [of the Phenomenal Life with the Nirvāṇa] is attained are called (C) the group of people who conform in the right way.Of these [groups of living beings], keeping aside those people who stand firmly in the Great Vehicle and follow the unobstructed way, other people are [fourfold], i.e. the Icchantikas, the Heretics, the Śrāvakas and the Pratyekabuddhas.Of these [four groups], there are four kinds of Obstructions on account of which they cannot understand or realize the Essence of the Tathāgata. What are then the four Obstructions? --That is to say, 1) the enmity to the Doctrine of the Great Vehicle. This is the Obstruction of the Icchantikas, and its Antidote is the practice of the faith in the Doctrine of the Great Vehicle by the Bodhisattvas. 2) The conception of the Self on the separate elements. This is the Obstruction of the Heretics, and its Antidote is the practice of Supremacy in the transcendental Intellect by the Bodhisattvas.3) The notion of Suffering [or rather] the fear of Suffering in Phenomenal Life.This is the Obstruction of those who belong to the Vehicle of the Śrāvaka and its Antidote is the practice of Meditations, Gaganagañjā etc., by the Bodhisattvas.4) Aversion to the profit of living beings or Indifference to the profit of living beings. This is the Obstruction of those who belong to the Vehicle of the Pratyekabuddha and its Antidote is the practice of Great Compassion. by the Boddhisattvas.These are the four kinds of Obstructions of the four kinds of living beings. And having practised the four kinds of Antidotes to these Obstructions, i.e. the faith [in the Doctrine of the Great Vehicle] etc., the Bodhisattvas attain the highest purity, the highest truth, i.e. the Absolute Body. And, accompanied by these four causes of origination of purity, they become the sons of the Religious King in the Buddha’s family. How are they? It is said:
Those whose seed is the faith in the highest Vehicle, Whose mother is the transcendental Intellect, On account of the origination of Buddha’s Doctrine; Whose abiding womb is the bliśful meditation And whose nurse is called Mercy; They are the sons, the after-comers of the Buddhas. || 34 ||(III. PHALA & IV KARMAN) Now, with reference to the meaning of ‘result’ and ‘function’, there is one śloka. (Kārikā 7) The Supreme Virtues of Purity, Unityś, Bliś and Eternity; [These] are its results [of the purification]; [Towards this purification] it has the functions, Aversion to Suffering, longing for and praying for the acquisition of Quiescence. || 35 ||(§1. The Four Supreme Virtues as the Result of Purification.) Here, what is shown by the former half of this śloka? Because of the change of value in the Absolute Body, The results of these [4 causes] are, in short, [The Purity, etc.] represented as the Antidote To the four kinds of delusion. || 36 ||
Those terms, ‘the faith’. etc., have been taught as the causes of purification of the Essence of the Tathāgata. ‘Of these [four causes]’, in brief, the four kinds of Supreme Virtues of the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata are to be understood as ‘the results’ on account of their being Antidotes to the opposites of four kinds of delusion, respectively.Now, there is a notion of being eternal, bliśful, of substantial Ego, of being pure regarding the separate things consisting of form and others which are really non-eternal, full of sufferings, of no substantial Ego and impure, respectively. Such a notion is called ‘the fourfold delusion’.Being opposite to this notion, there should be known ‘the fourfold non-delusion’. Which four? That is to say, the notion of being non-eternal, full of sufferings, of no substantial Ego, and impure regarding just those separate things of form, etc. Such a notion is called the fourfold Opposite of delusion. And again, this very [notion of non-delusion] is implied as ‘delusion’ with reference to the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata whose characteristics are eternal, etc.Being the Antidote of this notion, there is established the fourfold Supreme Virtue of the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata. That is to say, the Supreme Eternity, the Supreme Bliś, the Supreme Unity, and the Supreme Purity. And this subject is to be known in detail according to the Scripture.[It runs as follows]: “O Lord, the people have a miscomprehension regarding the phenomenal things consisting of five personality aggregates which cling to existence so. They have a notion of eternity on the non-eternal things, a notion of bliss regarding painful things, of substantial Ego regarding non-substantial things, and have a notion of purity regarding impure things.Even all the Śrāvakas and Pratyekabuddhas, O Lord, also have a miscomprehension in regard to the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata which is the sphere of the Wisdom of Omniscience and has never been seen before just because of their knowledge of Non-substantiality.O Lord, if there would be the people who have the notion of Eternity, Unity, Bliś, and Purity [regarding the Absolute Body], they would he the legal sons of the Buddhas and be of no miscomprehension. O Lord, [verily] they would be of perfect perception. For what reason?[Because], O Lord, the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata is verily the Supreme Eternity, the Supreme Bliś, the Supreme Unity and the Supreme Purity. O Lord, those people who perceive the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata in this way, perceive perfectly. Those who perceive perfectly are, O Lord, the legal sons of the Buddhas” &c.
(§2. Concordance between Supreme Virtues and Causes of Purification.) And again, of these four Supreme Virtues of the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata, one should know the reversed arrangement according to the order of causes. Here, 1) being opposite to the taking of delight in the ‘impure’ Phenomenal Life by the Icchantikas who have hatred against the Doctrine of Great Vehicle, it should be understood that the acquisition of the Supreme Purity is the result of ‘Practice of the Faith in the Doctrine of Great Vehicle’ by the Bodhisattvas.2) Being opposite to the taking of delight in the perception of unreal Ego by the Heretics who perceive an Ego in the individual things consisting of five personality aggregates, it should be understood that the acquisition of the Supreme Unity is the result of ‘practice of supremacy in the transcendental Intellect’.Indeed, all the other Heretics consider the things consisting of form, etc. as the Ego though they are of the unreal nature. And this very thing as has been perceived by the Heretics does not correspond with the [real] characteristic of Ego, hence it is always non-Ego.On the contrary, the Tathāgata has attained the highest supremacy, [knowing] non-substantiality of all the phenomena by means of his Wisdom perceiving the truth. And this very non-substantiality as has been perceived by the Tathāgata is quite consistent with the characteristic of non-ego, hence there is always the implication of Ego, by taking non-Egoity in the meaning of Ego, as has been said: “He stands by application of no standing place”.
3) Being opposite to the taking of delight in the cessation of Sufferings of the Phenomenal Life alone by those who belong to the Vehicle Śrāvaka and who have fear of the sufferings of Phenomenal Life, it should be understood that the result of the practice of various kinds of meditation, named Gaganagañjā, etc. is the acquisition of the Supreme Bliss concerned with all matters, mundane and supermundane.4) Being opposite to the taking of delight in the isolated abode by those who belong to the Vehicle of Pratyekabuddha and who are indifferent to the benefits of living beings, it should be understood that the Bodhisattvas practice of Great Compassion has the acquisition of the Supreme Eternity as its result, because practising [for the sake of others] as long as the world exists, without interruption, their attachment to the benefits for living beings is perfectly pure.Thus, kinds of Supreme Virtues named Purity, Unity, Bliss and Eternity are brought about on the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata as the result of Bodhisattvas’ kinds of practices, namely, those of Faith [in the Doctrine of Great Vehicle], the Supremacy in the transcendental Intellect, the Meditations and the Great Compassion, respectively.And because of these four [Supreme Virtues in the Absolute Body] it is said, the Tathāgata is the highest Absolute Essence, he reaches up to the limit of the space and he lasts as long as the utmost limit [of the world].Indeed, the Tathāgata, through the practice of faith in the highest Doctrine of the Great Vehicle, has attained the highest state of the Absolute Essence which is the ultimate purity, hence he has become the highest Absolute Essence.Through the practice of the supremacy in the transcendental Intellect, [the Tathāgata] has realized perfectly the non-substantiality of living beings and of the material world, just as the sky [reaches up to the limit of the world] and, through the practice of various kinds of meditations named Gaganagañjā, etc. he has perfectly perceived the omnipresence of the power of the highest truth everywhere. Because of these two acquisitions, he reaches up to the limit of space.[And lastly], through the practice of the Great Compassion, [he has] mercy towards all living beings beyond the limitation of time. Therefore, with reference to this point, it is said he lasts as long as the utmost limit [of the world].
(§3. Impediments to the Attainment of the Supreme Virtues.) And now, for the acquisition of these four kinds of Supreme Virtues of the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata, there are four Impediments even in case of the Arhats, Pratyekabuddhas and those Bodhisattvas who have obtained [10] Controlling Powers, though they are abiding in the Immaculate Sphere.That is to say, 1) ‘phenomenon of condition’; 2) ‘phenomenon of cause’; 3) ‘phenomenon of origination’; and ‘phenomenon of destruction’. Here, ‘Phenomenon of condition’ means the Dwelling-place of Ignorance. [It is the condition of birth of the Body made of mind for the Saints] just as Ignorance is [the condition] of Predispositions [for ordinary people].2) ‘Phenomenon of cause’ means the Immaculate Action conditioned by the Dwelling-place of Ignorance [as the cause of the Body made of mind], [and it is to be] compared with the Predispositions [of ordinary people].3) ‘Phenomenon of origination’ means the origination of the 3-fold Body made of mind, conditioned by the Dwelling-place of Ignorance and caused by the Immaculate Action, just as the origination of the Three-Worlds is conditioned by kinds of Graspings and caused by the Passioned Actions.‘Phenomenon of destruction’ means Death as the inconceivable Transformation conditioned by the origination of the 3-fold Body made of mind. It corresponds to the Decrepitude and Death conditioned by the Birth [in the Three-Worlds].
Now, the Arhats, Pratyekabuddhas and those Bodhisattvas who have attained Controlling Powers, have not extirpated the Dwelling-place of Ignorance which is the ground of all the subsequent Defilements, hence they cannot attain the Supreme Purity as the end of removal of all the dusts of defilements with their bad-smelling impressions.And, on account of that Dwelling-place of Ignorance, and because of their being accompanied with the arising of the subtle-featured dualistic views, they cannot attain ultimately the Supreme Unity which is characterized as no accumulation of Active Force.And, on account of that Dwelling-place of Ignorance and Immaculate Action caused by the arising of the subtle-featured dualistic view conditioned by the Dwelling-place of Ignorance, there is [still] the arising of the Mind-made aggregate. Therefore, they cannot attain the ultimate Supreme Bliss as the extinction of this Spiritual Aggregate.And [lastly], unless they realize the Essence of the Tathāgata as being arisen from the entire extinction of all impurities in forms of Defilements, Actions and Originations, they cannot remove Death as the Inconceivable Transformation. Consequently, they cannot attain the absolutely unchangeable Supreme Eternity.Here, the Dwelling-place of Ignorance is to be compared with the Impurity of Defilements [in the case of ordinary people]. The performance of Immaculate Action corresponds to the Impurity of Actions. [And] the 3-fold origination of the Body made of mind and Death as the Inconceivable Transformation corresponds to the Impurity of Origination. And this passage is to be understood in detail according to the Scriprure. [It runs as follows]:“Lord, just as, being conditioned by [4] graspings and caused by passionate actions, there are produced the three spheres of existence; likewise, Lord, being conditioned by the dwelling-place of ignorance and caused by the immaculate actions, there are born the kinds of body made of mind of the Arhats, Pratyekabuddhas and those Bodhisattvas who have attained the [10] Controlling Powers.[Thus] O Lord, for the birth of the 3-fold Body made of mind in these lands and for the origination of the immaculate actions the dwelling-place of Ignorance is the [inevitable] condition, & c.”.Thus, in these Bodies made of mind of the Arhats, Pratyekabuddhas and Bodhisattvas, there are no Supreme Virtues of Purity, Unity, Bliss and Eternity. Therefore, it is said: “Only the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata is the Supreme Eternity, the Supreme Bliś, the Supreme Unity and the Supreme Purity”.
(§4. The Motives of the Supreme Virtues) Verily, the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata is pure Because of his innate purity and removal of Impressions; He is the highest Unity because he is quiescent, Having destroyed the dualistic view of Ego and non-Ego. || 37 ||He is bliśful because the Mind-made Aggregate And its causes have been removed [completely]; He is eternal because he has realized The equality of the Phenomenal Life and Nirvāṇa. || 38 ||
In short, by two reasons there should be known the Supreme Purity in the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata. That is to say, 1) through his being perfectly pure by nature, as the common feature; and 2) through his being perfectly pure by the removal of pollution, as the special feature [to the Buddha].The Supreme Unity, too, should be understood by two reasons: 1) because of the removal of false imagination of Ego by rejecting the extremity peculiar to the Heretics, and 2) because of the removal of false imagination concerning non-substantiality by rejecting the extremity peculiar to the Śrāvakas.The Supreme Bliss is to be known likewise by two reasons: 1) because of the abandonment of the origination of all sufferings as well as the extirpation of succeeding origination of Impressions; and 2) because of the realization of all sufferings as well as the realization of extinction of the Mind-made Aggregates.[And finally] by two reasons the Supreme Eternity is to be known: 1) Because he does not fall into the Nihilistic Extremity through his not diminishing, neglecting the non-eternal Phenomenal Life; 2) nor does he fall into the Eternalistic Extremity through his not intensifying the eternal Nirvāṇa.It is said as follows: “If someone would perceive that all the Phenomenal Worlds are non-eternal, O Lord, this view would be a Nihilistic Perception. It would never be the true perception at all. If someone would perceive that the Nirvāṇa is eternal, O Lord, this view would be an Eternalistic Perception. And it would never be the True Perception at all”.(§4. The Unstable Nirvāṇa.) Therefore, by this introduction to the theory s of the Absolute Essence, it is said from the highest viewpoint that the Phenomenal Life itself is Nirvāṇa, because [the Bodhisattvas] realize the Unstable Nirvāṇa, being indiscriminative of both [the Phenomenal Life and Nirvāṇa].
Moreover, they are neither entirely involved among all living beings nor remote from them, for two reasons. Here, therefore, the explanation will be made merely about how to attain this Unstable stability. Then, for which two reasons?Here, in this world, the Bodhisattva is not entirely involved among all living beings because he has completely rejected all tendencies of desires by means of the Transcendental Intellect. [At the same time], he is not remote from them since he never abandons them owing to his Great Compassion.This is the means for the acquisition of the Supreme Enlightenment of which the Unstability is the Essential nature. By means of the Intellect, indeed, the Bodhisattva has exterminated without remainder the tendency of desire, hence, being deeply intent towards the Nirvāṇa for his own sake, he does not stay in the Phenomenal Life as the lineage of no Nirvāṇa.[At the same time], owing to his Great Compassion, he never abandons those suffering people, hence, having activity in this Phenomenal Life, for the sake of others, he does not abide in the Nirvāṇa, as do those who seek only for Quiescence. Thus these two qualities i.e. the Intellect and Great Compassion are the root, i.e. the foundation of the Highest Enlightenment. [So it is said]:
[Though] Having destroyed affection for himself By means of the Intellect, completely, The Saint, being full of Mercy, does not approach Quiescence because of his affection for the people; Thus standing on both the Intellect and Mercy, These two means of Enlightenment, The Saint approaches neither this world nor Nirvāṇa. || 39 ||
(§5. The Functions of the Germ for its Purification IV.) Now, with reference to the subject of ‘function’ which is previously maintained in verse, what is shown by the latter half of that śloka? If there is no Essence of the Buddha, There will be no aversion to Suffering, Nor will there be desire, nor earnest wish, Nor prayer for Nirvāṇa. || 40 ||
So it is said: “O Lord, if there were no Matrix of the Tathāgata, then there would arise neither aversion to Suffering nor desire for Nirvāṇa, nor earnest wish for it or prayer for it”.Here, in brief, the Essence of the Buddha, the perfectly pure Germ, even of those people who are fixed in the wrong way has the two kinds of foundation of its actions.That is to say, it produces disgust with Phenomenal Life basing itself upon the perception of the fault of Suffering, and it calls forth longing, desire, earnest wish and prayer for the Nirvāṇa, basing itself upon the perception that happiness is the merit.Here, ‘longing’ means ‘expectation’. ‘Desire‘ means ‘uncowardliness’ for the attainment of the intended object. ‘Earnest Wish’ means ‘searching for’ the means to attain the intended object. ‘Prayer’ means `will’ or ‘manifestation of the mind’.
The perception of Phenomenal Life and Nirvāṇa, The former is full of Suffering; hence it is the fault, The latter is of bliś; therefore it is the merit; It exists only in case the Germ of the Buddha exists, And does not exist with people of no Germ. || 41 ||
The perception that Phenomenal Life is full of suffering, hence is the fault, and that Nirvāṇa is blissful, hence it is the merit, this perception belongs to those people who are possessed of good virtues and exists only in case the Germ [of the Tathāgata] exists. Thus this perception does not take place without causes or without conditions.Indeed, if it were without Germ, without causes and conditions and were not brought about through the extirpation of sin, it would exist even with the Icchantikas who are of the lineage of no Nirvāṇa.Really, it cannot take place unless they bring about the Germ which is purified from accidental pollutions and the faith in any one of three Vehicles through being endowed with the kinds of good actions, beginning with having contact with a personage of high virtue.(The saying: the Icchantikas are of no Nirvāṇa, is only conventional.) It is however said [in the Scripture]: “After this the rays of the disk of the sun-like Tathāgata fall upon the bodies of even those people who are fixed in the wrong way and make benefits for them. And furthermore producing the cause of future [bliś] [in them], they cause them to thrive with virtuous qualities”.And also the saying: “the Icchantikas are by all means of the nature of no Perfect Nirvāṇa” is taught in order to remove the hatred against the Doctrine of the Great Vehicle, this being the cause of their being Icchantikas and refers to a certain period of time.Indeed, as there exists the Germ which is pure by nature, none could be of the absolutely impure nature. Therefore, with reference to the fact that all living beings, with no difference, have the pośibility of being purified, the Lord has said again:“Though being beginningless, indeed, [The Phenomenal Life] has its end; Being pure by nature, It is endowed with Eternity; Being covered from outside By the beginningless sheath [of defilements], [This nature] is however invisible, Just as gold concealed [in sand and dust]”.
(V. YOGA) Now, with reference to the meaning of ‘Union’, there is one śloka. (Kārikā 8) Being the inexhaustible storage of jewels of immeasurable virtues, [The Germ of the Buddha is] like the Ocean; It is akin to the lantern, because of its nature of Being endowed with properties indivisible [from it]. || 42 ||(§1. The Union of the Germ with the Factors of its Purification.) Here, what is shown by the former half of this śloka? Because it consists of the sources of the Absolute Body, Of the Buddha’s Wisdom and Compassion, There is shown the similarity of the Germ with the ocean, Through being receptacle, jewels and water. || 43 ||
On account of three points, the Essence of the Tathāgata has a resemblance to the great ocean in three ways, respectively, and through this similarity, the subject ‘Union’ should be understood in the sense that the Essence of the Tathāgata is provided with causes [of its purification].Then, which are the three points? They are namely: [its being provided with] 1) the cause of purification of the Absolute Body; 2) the cause of the attainment of Buddha’s Wisdom; 3) and the cause of the manifestation of Buddha’s Great Compassion.Here, 1) ‘the cause of purification of the Absolute Body’ is to be known as the practice of faith in [the Doctrine of] the Great Vehicle; 2) ‘the cause of the attainment of Buddha’s Wisdom’, the practice of the introduction to the highest Intellect and Meditation; 3) and ‘the cause of the manifestation of Buddha’s Great Compassion’, the practice of Bodhisattva’s Great Compassion.Here, the practice of faith in [the Doctrine] of the Great Vehicle has a similarity to the ‘receptacle’ because, in this [receptacle], there is an accumulation of the jewel of Intellect and Meditation as well as the water of Compassion which are immeasurable and inexhaustible.The practice of the introduction to the highest Intellect and Meditation has a similarity to ‘jewel’ because of its being indiscriminative and being endowed with inconceivable and powerful virtues.The practice of Bodhisattva’s Compassion has a similarity to ‘water’ because, in all the world, it manifests the highest moisture with the feature of one and the same taste. This coherence i.e. the accompaniment of these three things the Absolute Body and others, with these three causes, the practice of faith, etc., is here called ‘Union’.
(§2. The Union of the Germ with the Result of Purification.) Now, what is shown by the latter half of the śloka? In the immaculate basis, the supernatural faculties, The Wisdom and Immaculateness are inseparable from Reality; Therefore, they have a resemblance to a lantern, On account of its light, heat and colour. || 44 ||
The subject, ‘Union’ is here to be understood in the sense that the Essence of the Tathāgata is accompanied by the results [of its purification], through its similarity to a lantern in three ways on account of three points, respectively.Then, which are the three points? Namely, [the Essence of the Buddha is endowed with] 1) the Supernatural Faculties; 2) the Wisdom by which the evil influence is destroyed; 3) and the Extinction of Evil Influence. Here, the Supernatural faculties have a resemblance to ‘light of flame’ because they have a characteristic of engaging in the extinction of darkness which is opposite to the knowledge which perceives an object.The Wisdom by which the Evil Influence is destroyed is similar to ‘heat’ because of its characteristic of engaging in consuming the fuel of the Active force and Defilements, leaving no residue. The Extinction of Evil Influence as the [result of] the Perfect Manifestation of the Basis has resemblance to ‘colour’ because of its characteristic of being perfectly stainless, pure and radiant.Here, it is ‘stainless’ because it has destroyed the Obstruction caused by moral Defilements. It is ‘pure’ because it has destroyed the Obstruction on account of knowable things. It is ‘radiant’ [by nature] because these two [Obstructions] are merely of an occasional nature.Thus, in brief, the properties of those people who have nothing further to learn summarized in these seven, i.e. the Supernatural Faculties, the Wisdom destroying the Evil Influence and the Destruction [of Evil Influence], are in the Immaculate Sphere, inseparable from each other, not different [from each other] and coherent with the Absolute. This point is here called ‘Union’.And with reference to this subject of ‘Union’, the example of a lantern is to be understood in detail according to the sūtra. “O Śāriputra, just as a lantern is of indivisible nature and its qualities are inseparable from it. That is to say, [it is] indivisible [inseparable], from light, heat and color. The precious stone is also [indivisible, inseparable], from its light, color and shape.In the same way, Śāriputra, the Absolute Body, taught by the Tathāgata is of indivisible nature, of the qualities inseparable from Wisdom (i.e. Enlightenment). That is to say, [indivisible, inseparable], from the Properties of the Tathāgata which are far beyond the sand of the Ganga in number”.
(VI. VṚTTI) Now, with reference to the meaning of’manifestation’, there is one śloka. (Kārikā) The Ordinary People, the Saints, and the Buddhas, They are indivisible from Reality, Therefore, the Matrix of the Buddha exists among [all] living beings; Thus it is taught by the perceivers of the Reality. || 45 ||What is shown by this śloka? The Ordinary People are of erroneous conception, Being opposite to them, [the Saints are] the perceivers of the truth, And being of the perfectly right conception, The Buddhas are apart from the dualistic view. || 46 ||
In connection with the introductory teaching of the Non-discriminative Wisdom, it has been taught, in the Prajñāparamitā, etc., for the Bodhisattvas that the Essence of the Tathāgata has the general characteristic of being Reality, the perfect purity, i.e. the Suchness of all the elements. On the basis of this general characteristic, it should be known in brief, there are threefold different manifestations of three kinds of people:...of the Ordinary People who do not perceive the Truth, of the Saints who perceive the Truth and of the Tathāgata who has attained the ultimate purity.In other words, they are ‘of the erroneous conception’, ‘of the right conception’, and ‘of the perfectly right conception and of no dualistic view’, respectively. Here, ‘of the erroneous conception’ is because Ordinary People have delusion on account of their conception, mind and perception. ‘Of the right conception’ is because the Saints, being opposite to them, have destroyed the delusion. [And lastly], ‘of the perfectly right conception and of no dualistic view’ is because the Perfectly Enlightened Ones have dispelled the Obstructions of moral defilement and of knowable things along with their Impressions.(VII. AVASTHĀPRABHEDA) Hereafter, with reference to this subject of ‘manifestation’, other four subjects should be understood through the detailed explanation [on each subject]. Here, [first of all], with reference to the subject, ‘different states’ among these three kinds of people, there is one śloka.
(Kārikā) Impure, [partly] pure and [partly] impure, And perfectly pure these are said of The Ordinary beings, the Bodhisattvas, And the Tathāgata, respectively. || 47 ||What is shown by this śloka? The Essence [of the Buddha], [hitherto briefly explained] By these six subjects, beginning with ‘own nature’, Is, in accordance with its states, Designated by different names. || 48 ||
Any teaching referring to the immaculate Essence [of the Buddha], taught by the Lord in detail through various divisions of Scripture is hitherto briefly summarized by six subjects, namely, ‘own nature’, ‘cause’ [of purification], ‘result’ [of purification], ‘function’ [towards purification], ‘union’ [with the cause and result], and ‘manifestation’. This very Essence of the Buddha is here to be known as being taught through the teaching of different names in accordance with its states, respectively.That is to say, 1) in the ‘impure’ state [the Essence of the Buddha is named] ‘the Ordinary Beings’; 2) in the ‘[partly] pure and [partly] impure’ state, the Bodhisattva; 3) and in the‘perfectly pure’, the Tathāgata. It has been said by the Lord: “Śāriputra, this Absolute Body, when it is covered with the limitless sheath of defilements, being carried by the stream of the Phenomenal Life and moving to and fro between death and birth in the course of the beginningless Phenomenal Life, is called ‘the [ordinary] living beings’.This same Absolute Body, O Śāriputra, when it has become averse to the Suffering in the stream of Phenomenal Life and become free from all the objects of desire, doing the practice towards Enlightenment by means of the 10 Supreme Virtues as including and representing all of the 84 thousand groups of Doctrines, it is called ‘the Bodhisattva’.Furthermore, O Śāriputra, this very Absolute Body, when, having been perfectly released from all the sheaths of defilements, having surpaśed all the Sufferings, having rejected all stains of subsequent defilements, it has become pure, perfectly pure, and, abiding in the Absolute Essence which is the highest point of purity, ascending to the stage to be looked upon by all living beings, has attained the unexcelled, manly strength among all knowable spheres, and has attained the Controlling Power on all separate elements, which is of no obstruction and of no hindrance, then it is called the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfectly Enlightened One”.
(VIII. SARVATRAGA) The Essence of the Tathāgata is ‘all-pervading’ in these three states. With reference to this meaning, there is one śloka. (Kārikā) Just as being of indiscriminative nature, Space pervades everywhere, Similarly all-pervading is the Essence, The immaculate nature of the mind. || 49 ||What is shown by this śloka? It pervades with common feature The defective, the virtuous and the ultimate, Just as space occupies all the visible forms, Either inferior, middle, or superior. || 50 ||
That which is the indiscriminative Innate Mind of the ordinary people, of the Saints and of the Buddhas has a common feature in these three states, irrespective of their being defective, virtuous or the ultimate point of pure virtue. Therefore, just as space penetrates all the receptacles regardless of material, whether clay, silver or gold, it is all-pervading, all-embracing, equal, of no difference and is present always.For this reason, it has been said in the same scripture, immediately after the explanation of different states: “Therefore, O Śāriputra, the [ordinary] living beings and the Absolute Body are not different from each other. The living beings are nothing but the Absolute Body, and the Absolute Body is nothing but the living beings. These two are non-dual by meaning, and different merely by letters”.(IX. AVIKĀRA) Now, the Essence of the Tathāgata, being all-pervading in these three states, is, moreover, unchangeable either by Impurity or through purification. With reference to this subject, there are 14 ślokas. [Prior to the explanation of these ślokas], the summarized meaning of these ślokas is to be known by the following verse:
Being possessed of faults by occasion, It is, however, endowed with virtues by nature; Therefore it is of unchangeable character In the beginning as well as afterwards. || 51 ||
In the impure state as well as in the pure and impure state, which are shown by the [first] 12 ślokas and by the [next] one śloka, respectively, [the Essence of the Tathāgata] is possessed of faults caused by fundamental and subsequent defilements ‘by occasion’. [On the contrary], in the perfectly pure state, shown by the 14th śloka, it is ‘Essentially’ endowed with the Buddha’s virtues which are indivisible [from the Absolute Body], inseparable from Wisdom, inconceivable and far greater in number than the sands of Ganga. Therefore it is explained that the Essence of the Tathāgata, like space, is of absolutely unchangeable character throughout different states.(A. Unchangeability in the Impure State) First of all, with reference to the subject of ‘unchangeability’ [of the Essence of the Tathāgata] in the Impure State, what is said in 12 ślokas ? (Kārikās 12-23) Just as space, being all-pervading, Cannot be polluted because of its subtle nature; Similarly, abiding everywhere among living beings, This [Essence] remains unpolluted [by defilements]. || 52 ||
Just as the worlds have everywhere Their origination and destruction in space; Similarly, on the basis of the Innate Essence The sense-organs appear and disappear || 53 ||Just as space has never been burnt By the fire [at the end of the world]; Likewise the fires of death, of illness and decrepitude Cannot consume this [Essence of the Buddha]. || 54 ||The earth is supported by water, Water by air, and air by space; Space has, however, no support Neither in air, nor in water, nor in the earth. || 55 ||Similarly all the component elements [of Phenomenal Life] Have their foundation in the Active Force and Defilements, And the Active Force and Defilements exist always On the basis of the Irrational Thought. || 56 ||The Irrational Thought is founded In the [innate] mind which is pure, The innate mind has, however, no support In any [of the worldly] phenomena. || 57 ||All the component elements of Phenomenal Life Are known as akin to the earth, And the Active Force and Defilements of living beings Are known as akin to water. || 58 ||The Irrational Thought is known As having resemblance to air; Being of no root and of no support, The Innate Mind is like space. || 59 ||Abiding in the Innate Mind, There occurs the irrational action of mind By the Irrational Action of mind, The Active Force and Defilements are produced. || 60 ||All the component elements of Phenomenal Life, Originated from the waterlike Active Force and Defilements, Show their appearance and disappearance [repeatedly], Just as [the world repeats its] evolution and devolution a. || 61 ||The Innate Mind is like space, Being of no cause or condition, Or complex [of producing factors], It has neither origination nor destruction, Nor even stability [between two points]. || 62 ||The innate nature of the mind is brilliant And, like space, has no transformation at all; It bears, however, the impurity by stains of desires, etc. Which are of accident and produced by wrong conception. || 63 ||
(§1. Unoriginated Character of the Innate Mind.) By this analogy of space, how is the unchangeable character of the Essence of the Tathāgata in the impure state explained? It is said as follows :
The accumulation of water-like Active Force and Defilements Cannot produce this space-like [Innate Mind], And even the growing fires of death, of illness and old age Cannot consume [this Innate Mind]. || 64 ||
The origination of the world claśified into [5] elementary groups, [18] component elements or [12] bases of cognition is conditioned by the accumulation of water-like Active Force and Defilements, which is, in its turn, based upon wind-circle of Irrational Thought. But this origination of the world never causes the evolution of the Innate Mind which has a resemblance to space.In the same way, a group of fires of death, of illness and decrepitude arises in order to destroy the world claśified into five elementary groups, component elements or bases of cognition which is founded on the accumulation of air-like Irrational Thought and water-like Active Force and Defilements. But even by this arising of the fires of death, etc., it should he known that the Innate Mind cannot be destroyed.Thus, in the impure state, though all the Impurity of Defilements, of Active Force and Birth show their appearance and disappearance like the material world’s, the Innate Essence of the Tathāgata is, like space, of no origination and destruction. Therefore, it is explained as being absolutely of unchangeable character.And this example of space which refers to the introduction to the light of doctrine on the Innate Purity [of the mind] is to be understood in detail according to the Scripture“O Honorable Men, Defilements are the darkness, the Pure [Mind] is the light. Defilements are of weak power but the correct intuition is powerful. Defilements are merely accidental, but the Innate Mind is of a pure root. Defilements are of wrong discrimination, but the Innate Mind is indiscriminative.For example, O Honorable Men, this great earth has its foundation in water. Water is supported by air, and air is founded on space. But space, in its turn, has no foundation. Thus, among these four gross elements, space is more powerful than any of the other three elements, earth, water or air. It is also firm, immovable, neither increasing nor diminishing, neither originated nor destroyed and is stable with its own Essence.[On the contrary], these three gross elements [other than space] are possessed of origination and destruction, unstable and of no long duration. It will be perceived that these three gross elements are changeable, but space is by no means changeable.“In a similar manner, all the component elements [of the Phenomenal Life claśified into] elementary groups, 18 component elements, or 12 bases of cognition have their support in the Active Force and Defilements. The Active Force and Defilements are founded on the Irrational Thought and the latter has its support in the Innate Pure Mind. Therefore, it is said: the Mind is radiant by nature, [but it] is polluted by the occasional defilements”.After this passage, it is continued as follows: Now, all these phenomena, the Irrational Thought, the Active Force and Defilements, and all of the component elements of the Phenomenal Life are originated by the complex of their causes and conditions. When these causes and conditions lose their complexity they are immediately extinguished. On the contrary, the Innate Mind is of no cause nor condition. Consequently, it has no complex [of cause and condition] and hence there is neither origination nor destruction of it.Here, the Innate Mind is like space, the Irrational Thought is like air, the Active Force and Defilements are like water and all of the component elements of the Phenomenal Life are akin to earth. Therefore, it is said: “all phenomena are completely devoid of any root and based upon an unreal and unstable foundation, [because they are of unreal nature, but at the same time] they are founded on a pure [Essence] which is, in its turn, of no root”.
(2§ Indestructible Character of the Innate Mind.) We have already explained that in the impure state the Innate Mind has a resemblance to space on account of its ‘unchangeable’ characteristic; the Irrational Thought and the Active Force and Defilements, being founded on the Innate Mind, have a resemblance to air and water, respectively, on account of their characteristic of ‘cause’, and [lastly] all of the Component Elements of Phenomenal Life, being produced from the former two, have a resemblance to the earth on account of their characteristic of ‘fruit’.We have not, however, discussed the similarity of the fires of death, illness and decrepitude to the gross element of fire as being the cause of the annihilation of Life and on account of their characteristic of being’infection’. So, on this point it is said as follows:
The three fires, the fire at the end of the world, The fire of hell and the ordinary fire, These are to be known respectively as the analog yFor three fires, that of death, of sickness and old age. || 65 ||
The similarity of death, illness and old age to fire should be known for three reasons, respectively. [Which are the three reasons ? They are namely]: because [death] leads the [internal] bases of cognition to destruction ; 2) [illness] makes sufferings of various kinds of torments ; and 3) [old age] leads the Active Forces to their ripening.Even by these fires, the Essence of the Tathāgata in its impure state cannot be changed at all. With reference to this point, it is said [in the Scripture]: “Lord, something is dead, something is born, such sayings are merely a worldly usage. The saying ‘something is dead’, Lord, this means the destruction of sense organs. Something is born means, Lord, origination of new sense organs.However, Lord, the Matrix of the Tathāgata is never born, never decays, never deceases, never paśes away or arises [again]. For what reasons? Because, O Lord, the Matrix of the Tathāgata, being beyond the sphere characterized as being caused and conditioned, is eternal, constant, quiescent and everlasting”.
(B. Unchangeability in the Pure and Impure State) Now there comes one śloka referring to the meaning of ‘unchangeability’ in the pure and impure state [of Bodhisattvas]. (Kārikā 24) Having truly realized the Innate Mind As being released from birth and death As well as from illness and decrepitude, The Bodhisattvas have no calamity of birth and so forth; Still, because of the rising of Compassion towards the world, They assume the cause of calamities. || 66 ||(§1. The Pure Character and Impure Character of the Bodhisattva.) What is shown by this śloka? The sufferings of death, illness and decrepitude Are destroyed by the Saints to the root; There is a birth by the power of Active Force and Defilements; As there is no birth [of such a kind] The saints have no root [of defilements]. || 67 ||
Now, in the impure state, the causa materialis of the fires of sufferings like death, illness and decrepitude is the Birth based upon the Irrational Thought, the Active Force and Defilements, just as the fuel [is the causa materialis of ordinary fires]. In the pure and impure state, however, there is no appearance whatever of such a cause that we can know of; there is also no flame of fires of suffering at all in the Bodhisattvas who have attained the Body made of mind.
They, being full of mercy, make appearance Of birth, death, decrepitude and illness, Though they have got rid of birth, etc. Because of their perception of the truth. || 68 ||
Indeed, because of their contact with the virtuous root Bodhisattvas attach themselves to the Phenomenal World consisting of three spheres, basing themselves uponl the power of origination by their Will. Also they make appearance of birth, of old age, of illness and of death.Still, there are in reality no such phenomena of birth, etc. among them. Because, of course, they have truly perceived that the Essence [of the Buddha] is of no birth and of no origination. (References to the scriptures)(§2. Defilements endowed with Virtuous Root.) And this state of Bodhisattvas is to be understood in detail according to the Scripture. It is said :“Which are the Defilements endowed with virtuous root that cause [Bodhisattvas] to reside in the Phenomenal World? They are namely: Non-satisfaction in searching for the accumulation of merits; Acceptance of existence through origination by their own will;The earnest wish to meet with the Buddhas; Unweariness towards the perfect maturity of living beings. Efforts for the perfect apprehension of the sublime Doctrine ; Endeavour after works to be done for the living beings; Non-abandonment of propensity of desire for phenomena; Non reluctance from fetters of the Highest Virtues.O Sāgaramati, thus are the Defilements endowed with the virtuous roots by which the Bodhisattvas attach themselves [to this world], but they are never affected by the fault of Defilements....Then [Sagaramati] asked: Why then, O Lord, are the virtuous roots called’Defilements’?... [The Lord] answered: Because, O Sagaramati, by these Defilements of such kinds Bodhisattvas attach themselves to the Phenomenal World. And this Phenomenal World is of origination from Defilements.There, to this very Phenomenal World, Bodhisattvas attach themselves at their own wishes by their skill of means and through producing the power of virtuous roots. Therefore, it is called `Defilements endowed with the roots of virtuous qualities. [It is called so] inasmuch as they attach themselves to the Phenomenal World, but not because of [actual] defilements on the mind”.
(§3. Bodhisattvas’ Compassion.) The parable of a Householder. “For example, O Sagaramati, suppose there were an only son of some distinguished person or householder. Suppose he were beloved, handsome, affectionate quite agreeable in his appearance. Now suppose this boy, being a child, would fall into a pit of night-soil while playing. Thereupon the mother and relatives of this boy would see him fall into the impure pit.Upon seeing this they would deeply sigh, lament and would cry out. They could not, however, take the boy out by entering into the pit. After that the boy’s father would come to that place, and would see his only son fallen in the pit of night-soil. Upon seeing that sight, he being affected by the intention to pull out his only son, would hurry to enter the pit with full speed without any feeling of disgust, and would take out his only son.O Sagaramati, this example was made in order to make known a special meaning. Which relation should be known [between illustrations and illustrated meaning]? O Sagamarati, ‘a pit of night-soil’ is a name for the Phenomenal Life.‘An only son’ is a name for the living beings, because Bodhisattvas have a notion of the only son towards all living beings.‘Mother and relatives’ is a name for those people who belong to the Vehicles of Śrāvaka and Pratyekabuddha, since they, having seen the living beings fallen into the world of transmigration, are distreśed and lament, but have no capacity to rescue [the living beings].‘The distinguished person or the householder’ is a name for the Bodhisattva who is pure, unpolluted, of unpolluted mind, has attained the direct perception of the immutable Absolute, but still, in order to bring living beings to the maturity, connects himself to the Phenomenal World by his own will.O Sagaramati, such is the Great Compassion of the Bodhisattva that, being perfectly free from all bondage, he again assumes the origination into Existence. Being possessed of the skill of means and the Transcendental Intellect, he is never affected by impurities; and, in order to extirpate all the bondage of Defilements from the living beings, he preaches the Doctrine”.By this explanation of words in the Scripture, there is explained the pure and impure state of Bodhisattvas who have the Controlling Power through two points: [namely] the Bodhisattva attaches himself at his will to the origination in the world, for the sake of others, by the powers of virtuous roots and Compassion, but, at the same time, he is not polluted by the world owing to the powers of means and the Intellect.
(§4. Bodhisattva’s Perception on the Pure Mind.) Now, when a Bodhisattva has attained the correct perception of the Essence of the Tathāgata as being of no birth, no origination, then he can obtain this Essential quality as a Bodhisattva. This point should be understood in detail according to the [same] Scripture.It is said:“O Sagaramati, perceive that separate elements are of no real Essence, of no creator, of no substance, nonexistence, lifeless, of no personality and of no owner ! Indeed, these elements are illusorily created according to desire. As being illusorily created, they cannot cause [one] to think or to imagine.Believing in the fact that separate elements are created illusorily, O Sagaramati, the Bodhisattva does never produce the feeling of disgust for any phenomenon. He will be possessed of the pure and immaculate perception based upon the Wisdom that there is nothing which causes benefit or harm. Thus, he knows correctly the Essential nature of separate elements. And thus he does never cast off the armor of the Great Compassion.For example, O Sagaramati, suppose there were an invaluable Vaidurya stone, well polished, well purified, well cleaned. Suppose it might be thrown into mud and would remain there for a thousand years. After the paśing of a thousand years [in mud], this stone would be drawn out from mud and would be washed and cleaned. As being washed well, perfectly cleaned and polished, it would never abandon its nature of jewel, pure and immaculate.In the same way, O Sagaramati, the Bodhisattva knows the innate radiant nature of the mind of living beings. He perceives also that the same mind is defiled by the accidental defilements. Then the Bodhisattva thinks as follows:... These defilements would never penetrate into the radiant Innate Mind of the living beings. Being accidental, these defilements are the production of unreal, wrong discrimination.I can teach the Doctrine for the sake of these living beings in order to remove their accidenta defilements. Thus, he never has his mind demoralized and, with great intensity, he gives rise to the intention towards liberation in the case of living beings.Again he thinks as follows: “These defilements have no power and ability. They are powerless, of weak power. They have no real foundation at all. These defilements are [produced] by incorrect discrimination. These defilements, when they are inspected by the real and correct perception, cannot be excited by any means. They should he investigated by us so that they might not contaminate again. Indeed, it is a good thing not to he contaminated by defilements, not a good thing to be contaminated.If I were contaminated by defilements, how could I teach the Doctrine for the sake of the living beings who are bound by the bondage of defilements, in order to remove these bondage of defilements ? Oh! Really, we are not attached to defilements; therefore, we shall teach the Doctrine to the living beings in order to remove the bondage of defilements.And moreover, in order to bring the living beings to their maturity, we should be attached to the defilements, by which we are bound to the world of transmigration, which are at the same time endowed with the roots of virtues”.
§5. ’Samsara’ in the Case of Bodhisattva. And here, the expression ‘World of transmigration’ implies the three kinds of Body made of mind in the Immaculate Sphere, being an image similar to thats in the Phenomenal World. Indeed, it is the World of Transmigration because it is manifested under the influence of immaculate roots of virtue. At the same time, it is the Nirvāṇa because it is not manifested under the influence of the passionate Active Force and Defilements.With regard to this point, it is said :“Therefore, O Lord, there is the Phenomenal World, conditioned as well as unconditioned. There is the Nirvāṇa, conditioned as well as unconditioned”. Here, being endowed with the manifestation of mind and mental states mixing both, the conditioned and the unconditioned, this is called ‘the pure and impure state’.§6. Bodhisattva in His 6th Stage. And this state is predominantly established in the th Stage of Bodhisattva called Abhimukhl ready for the Enlightenment. Because, [in this Stage], the Bodhisattva, facing the acquisition of the Extinction of Evil Influences through his practices of unobstructed Highest Intellect and the Great Compassion, still does never realize that acquisition in order to protect all living beings.
With reference to this Wisdom for the Extinction of Evil Influences, there is an illustration of a castle in the Scripture. It runs as follows:... omission. Thus, through the origination of the Great Intention [towards the Nirvāṇa] by great efforts and exertion, the Bodhisattva gives rise to the Supernatural Faculties. Having the mind purified by the contemplation and Supernatural faculties, he becomes ready for the Extinction of Evil Influences.Having cultivated the Wisdom for the Extinction of Evil Influences in order to rescue all living beings through the origination of the mind of Compassion, he, with perfectly purified mind, produces the unobstructed Intellect in the th Stage and again becomes ready for the Extinction of Evil Influences. In this way is explained the ‘pure’ state of the Bodhisattva who has obtained the power for realization of the Extinction of Evil influences in the [th] Stage of the Bodhisattva named Abhimukhi.[On the other hand], he, though having practiced correctly for his own sake, still wishes to save the living beings who are on the wrong way, owing to the Great Compassion, saying: I will lead the others also to this true practice. While cultivating the means for the bliss of the Quiescence, but not in order to taste it [by himself] he turns his face away from Nirvāṇa, for the sake of the living beings who are facing the world of transmigration.Though abiding [in the desireless World of Form] with [ kinds of] contemplations in order to accomplish the factors for the acquisition of Enlightenment, he voluntarily asumes again the existence in the World of Desire and wishes to work for the sake of living beings as quickly as pośible.[Thus] he has obtained the power for manifesting the body of ordinary beings by asuming various births [even] in the form of animals. From these points mentioned above his state is explained as ‘not perfectly pure’.
The Pure and Impure State of the Bodhisattva in comparison with the Ordinary Being and the Buddha. Another interpretation of the verse. There is another meaning of the śloka Kārikā, v.. The son of the Buddha, though having understood that This Absolute Essence is unchangeable, Is still perceived by the ignorant In the appearances of birth, etc.: This is really wonderful! ||Having attained the position of the Saints He is nevertheless seen among ordinary beings; Therefore, he is, for the friends of all the world, The Highest Means and Compassion. || ||Being superior to all kinds of worlds, He is nevertheless not apart from the world, He acts in the world for the sake of the world Without being affected by the worldly pollution. || ||Just as a lotus flower growing in the water Is not polluted by the latter, Similarly, though having been born in the world He is never polluted by worldly matters. || ||His intelligence is always burning like fire For bringing about the welfare [to the world]; At the same time, he is always practicing Meditation and concentration on the Quiescence ; || ||Owing to the continuing force of the previous life, And because of being free from all discriminations, He does not use any exertion at all For bringing the living beings to their maturity. || ||The Bodhisattva, knowing who is to be trained In what manner and by what means [Performs it] in the proper manner: By means of teaching, of two apparitional forms, By conduct [of ordinary life] or by religious observances. || ||In such a way, he does always, With no effort and with unobstructed Wisdom, Bring benefits for the living beings Among the world, limitless like the sky. || ||Having obtained this position, The Bodhisattva becomes equal to the Tathāgata On account of his act of conveying the living beings In various worlds, to the other shore. || ||There is however a great difference Between Bodhisattvas and the Buddha, Such difference as lies between the atom and the earth, Or in [the water] in a footprint of a bull and in the ocean. || ||
Of these ten verses taken respectively, [the first] verses refer to the comparison [of the state of Bodhisattva] with the absolute impurity of those who rank below the lst Stage of Bodhisattva named Pramudita Joy, and the th verse refers to the comparison with the supreme purity of the Stage above the [th] Stage of Bodhisattva named Dharmameghd Cloud of Doctrine i.e. the Stage of the Buddha.[In comparison with the states, both below and above], there is explained in brief the purity and impurity of the four kinds of Bodhisattvas in the Stages of Bodhisattva. The four kinds of Bodhisattvas are as follows: He who has resolved upon the acquisition for the first time; He who is practising the way towards the acquisition; He who has ascended the irreversible stage, and; He who is expected to be the Buddha in the next birth.Here, by the first and second verses, there are explained the pure characteristics of qualities of the Bodhisattva who is abiding on the Stage of Pramuditd resolving upon the acquisition for the first time, because [in this stage] he has understood the highest supermundane Essence which had never been seen before since beginningless time.By the third and the fourth verses, there are explained the pure characteristics of qualities of the Bodhisattva who is practising the way to the acquisition in the Stages beginning with [the 2nd named] Vimalā up to [the 7th named] Dūraṃgamā (Far-Going), because [in these stages] he practises the unpolluted practices.By the 5th verse, there are explained the pure characteristics of qualities of the Bodhisattva who has got the irreversible state in the [th] Stage named Acald Immovable, because [in this stage] be has firmly stood in the meditation as the practice immediately connected with the acquisition of the Great Enlightenment.By the 6th, 7th and 8th verses, there are explained the pure characteristics of qualities of the Bodhisattva who is abiding on the th Stage named Dharmameghā, being expected to be the Buddha in the next birth, because [in this last stage] he, having attained the ultimate point of means for fulfilling all the benefits for his own as well as for others, is connected with the Stage of the Buddha by one and the last birth on account of the acquisition of the Supreme Perfect Enlightenment.By the 9th and 10th verses, there are explained the equality and difference between the purity of qualities of the Bodhisattva who has reached the ultimate point with regard to the aim of others and of his own, and that of the Buddha’s qualities.
(C) Unchangeability in the Perfectly Pure State. Now, we have one śloka with reference to the meaning of ‘unchangeability’ in the perfectly pure state [of the Buddha]. Kārikā This [Essence of the Buddha] is of unalterable nature Because it is endowed with inexhaustible properties, It is the refuge of the world Because it has no limit in the future; It is always non-dual Because it is indiscriminative, Also it is of undestructible nature Because its own nature is not created [by conditions]. || ||What is shown by this śloka? It is not born, nor does it die; It does not suffer [from illness], nor is it decrepit. Because it is eternal, Everlasting, quiescent and constant. || ||Being eternal, it is not born Even with [the form of] the Body made of mind, Being everlasting, it does not die Even with the Inconceivable Transformation. || ||Being quiescent, it has no suffering From the illness of subtle defiling forces, And, being constant, it does not become decrepit By the accumulation of the Passionless Active Force. || ||
Indeed, this Essence of the Tathāgata, in case it is abiding on the Stage of the Buddha which is absolutely immaculate, pure and radiant by its own nature, is ‘eternal’ in regard to its beginning. Therefore, it is never born even in the form of Body made of mind.Being ‘everlasting’ in regard to its end, it does not die in the manner of the inconceivable Transformation. Being ‘quiescent’ in regard to both, beginning and end, it never suffers from illness depending on the Dwelling Place of Ignorance.Thus, not falling into misery, it is ‘constant’ , and consequently never becomes decrepit through the transformation brought about by the Passionless Active Force.
Here, the meaning of Eternity, etc. In regard to the immutable Sphere Is to be known, respectively, By each couple of terms. || ||
Of these four terms, namely ‘eternal’, ‘everlasting’, ‘quiescent’ and ‘constant’, the distinction of the meaning of each term in regard of the Immutable Sphere is to be understood by each couple of terms showing ‘statement’ and ‘explanation’, respectively, according to the Scripture.It is said as follows: “This Absolute Body, O Śāriputra, is Eternal since it is of unalterable nature through its inexhaustible properties. This Absolute Body, O Śāriputra, is Everlasting, the everlasting refuge, because it exists as far as the farthest limit. Being of indiscriminative nature, O Śāriputra, this Absolute Body is Quiescent, of nondualistic nature. Being of uncreated nature, O Śāriputra, this Absolute Body is Constant, of undestructible character”.
(X) ASAMBHEDA The Essence of the Tathāgata characterized as having reached the ultimate point of perfect purification in this pure state is of undifferentiated nature. With reference to this meaning of ‘undifferentiation’ we have one śloka. Kārikā It is the Absolute Body, it is the Tathāgata, Also it is the Holy Truth, the Highest Nirvāṇa; Therefore, being indivisible from qualities like the sun with its rays, There is no Nirvāṇa, apart from the Buddhahood. || ||§1. Synonyms of the Essence of the Tathāgata. Here, what is shown by the former half of the śloka ? It should be known, in brief, There are synonyms, the Absolute Body and others Since [the Germ] in the Immaculate Sphere Has four meanings from different aspects. || ||
In short, there are four meanings in regard to the Matrix of the Tathāgata as the Immaculate Sphere or Essence. In accordance with these meanings, there should be known synonyms. Then which are the meanings?
It is indivisible from the Buddha’s Properties, Its Germ has been perfected as it is, It is not of false, deceptive nature, And it is quiescent from the very outset. || ||
1) The first meaning: [the Essence of the Buddha] is indivisible from the Buddha’s properties. With reference to this meaning, it is said as follows “Lord, the Matrix of the Tathāgata is not empty [because it is endowed] with the Buddha’s Properties which are inconceivable, indivisible, inseparable [from Wisdom] and are greater in number than the sands of the Gaṅga”.2) The second meaning: Its Germ, i.e. the Innate Nature has been perfected in an inconceivable manner. With reference to this point, it is said as follows: “[This Germ], having attained the Absolute Essence, has come down since beginningless time from one existence to another existence aśuming various forms consisting of six organs of cognitions, i.e. in the form of various living beings”.3) The third meaning: It is not of false, deceptive nature. With reference to this point, it is said as follows: “Here, that which is the Highest Truth is Nirvāṇa, whose nature is undeceptive. For what reason? Because the Germ is eternal by its being quiescent”.4) The fourth meaning: It is of the nature of absolute quiescence. With reference to this point, it is said as follows: Being in Nirvāṇa from the very outset, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, ie Perfectly enlightened One is of neither origination nor destruction. For these four meanings, there are four synonyms, namely, the Absolute Body; the Tathāgata; the Highest Truth, and the Nirvāṇa, respectively.It is said as follows: “The Matrix of the Tathāgata, Śāriputra, is the name for the Absolute Body. “Lord, the Tathāgata and the Absolute Body, these both are not different from each other. The Absolute Body is, Lord, nothing but the Tathāgata”. “Under the name of the Extinction of the Suffering, Lord, there is indicated the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata, being endowed with such properties”. “The Sphere of the Nirvāṇa, Lord, is the name for the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata”.
§2. The Point: Buddhahood is Nirvāṇa. Now, what is shown by the latter half of the śloka? Being the Perfect Enlightenment in all aspects, And being the removal of pollutions along their root, Buddhahood and Nirvāṇa Are one and the same in the highest viewpoint. ||||
These four synonyms of the Immaculate Essence converge into the undifferentiated meaning of the Essence of the Tathāgata. Therefore, these four are one in their sense, and hence, by means of the Doctrine of nonduality, the following fact is to be known.Namely, that which is called ‘Buddhahood’ because of its Perfect Enlightenment regarding all kinds of phenomena, and that which is called ‘Nirvāṇa’ because of its removal of pollutions along with their remaining forces which takes place simultaneously with the Perfect Enlightenment, these two are non-dual, indivisible and inseparable in the Immaculate Sphere.[So it is said]: “Liberation is of the characteristic Indivisible from the properties, which are Of all kinds, innumerable, unthinkable and immaculate ; This Liberation, that is the Tathāgata”. Also, it is said in the Scripture with reference to the Nirvāṇa of the Arhat and Pratyekabuddha: “[Here], O Lord, the Nirvāṇa is merely a means used by the Tathāgata”.By this passage it is explained that this [Nirvāṇa of the Arhats and the Pratyekabuddhas] is a means made by the Perfectly Enlightened Ones who have the highest Controlling Power on [all] phenomena in order to protect them i.e. Arhats and Pratyekabuddhas against retreat; it is just like the illusory city in the forest made for the travellers who are tired after their long way [in order to encourage them].[On the other hand] it is said: “By reason of having attained Nirvāṇa, O Lord, the Tathāgatas, the Arhats, the Perfectly Enlightened Ones are endowed with properties showing the ultimate point of the entireness, immeasurebility, inconceivability and purity”.By this passage it is explained that, having realized the Nirvāṇa which is characterized as being inseparable from the accomplishment of properties of four kinds, the Perfectly Enlightened Ones identify themselves with Nirvāṇa; therefore, as both of these, Buddhahood and Nirvāṇa, are endowed with inseparable properties, no one can realize Nirvāṇa apart from Buddhahood..§3. The Parable of the Painters. Now, in the Immaculate Sphere, the Buddhas are possessed of all kinds of properties since they have accomplished the Non-substantiality endowed with all sorts of excellency. This is here to be known through the illustration of the painters.
Suppose there were some painters, [Each of them] expert in, a different sphere, So that whatever skill possessed by one of them, The others could not understand. || ||Then a mighty king would give them A painting cloth with the following commandment: On this [cloth] ye all should draw my portrait. || 89 ||Then the painters, having promised [to the king], Would start their work of painting. Of these [painters] engaged in this work, One would have gone abroad. || 90 ||Because of his absence during his This picture would remain Without the completion of all parts; Thus the parable is made. || 91 ||The painters who are meant here are Charity, Morals, Patience and other dispositions, Being endowed with all kinds of these excellencies, The Non-substantiality is called the picture. || 92 ||
Here, of these [excellent virtues], charity and the rest, each one is differentiated into limitless varieties in accordance with the Buddha’s Sphere [of activity]. Therefore, it should be known as ‘immeasurable’. On account of its number and power, it should be known as being ‘inconceivable’ and, having exterminated the remaining force of pollutions, by its enemies, in the form of’ envy “ etc., [each virtue] is to be known as being ‘pure’.Now, through practice by means of Meditation on the Non-substantiality endowed with all sorts of excellencies, the Non-origination of [all] the elements is realized. Because of this realization, [Bodhisattvas can] ascend to their 8th Stage called Acalā (Immovable), where they can get the knowledge of the Path which is indiscriminative, faultless, without any break and bearing its own taste. On the basis of this knowledge, the entireness of Buddhas’ properties in the Immaculate Sphere is completed.On the Stage of Bodhisattva called Sādhumati (perfect Knowledge), by means of immeasurable forms of Meditation and magic formulas like the ocean, they can obtain the knowledge for aśuming the immeasurable properties of the Buddha. On the basis of this knowledge, the ‘immeasurability’ of [Buddhas ‘] properties is completed. On the Bodhisattva’s [last] Stage called Dharmameghā, basing himself upon the knowledge revealing the secret state of all the Buddhas, the ‘inconceivability’ of Buddhas’ properties is completed.Immediately after this stage, on the basis of knowledge which leads to the liberation from all impediments on account of Defilements and Knowables along with their remaining forces, aiming at the acquisition of the Stage of Buddha, the highest ‘purity’ of Buddhas’ properties is completed. As the Arhats and the Pratyekabuddhas cannot perceive these four knowledges, the foundations of these Stages [above Acalā], they are said to be far from the Sphere of the Nirvāṇa characterized as being indivisible from the accomplishment of the properties of the [above mentioned] four kinds.
(§4. Similarity of the Buddhahood to the Sun.) The Intellect, the Wisdom and the Liberation Are [respectively] bright, radiant, and clear, And they are inseparable from [the Absolute Essence]; Therefore, they are similar to the light, The rays, and the disk of the sun. || 93 ||
That which is indicated as the Sphere of the Nirvāṇa characterized as being inseparable from the accomplishment of four kinds of properties through the Intellect, the Wisdom and the Liberation, is explained to have similarity to the sun in four aspects, namely, by three aspects on account of the Intellect, etc., respectively, and by one [in general].Here in the Buddha’s body, 1) The transcendental Intellect which is supermundane and indiscriminative is, through its engaging in the destruction of darkness [that hides] the highest true Essence of everything cognizable, akin to the light [of the sun]; 2) The Wisdom of Omniscience which is attained subsequently is, through its penetrating everything knowable of all kinds, without exception, akin to the radiance of the net of rays;3) The Liberation of the Innate Mind, the basis of the above two Intellect and Wisdom, has a resemblance to the purity of the disk of the sun through its being perfectly free from pollution and its being radiant; and 4) As these three are undifferentiated from the Absolute Essence, there is a similarity the light and others through their indivisibility [from the sun].
Therefore, without the acquisition of Buddhahood, There is no attainment of Nirvāṇa, Just as it is impośible to see the sun, Avoiding its light and rays. || 94 ||
Thus, within the Essence [of the Buddha] which is endowed with the virtuous qualities as its own nature constantly aśociated since beginningless time, there exists the Essential nature, of the indivisible properties of Tathāgatas. Therefore, unless the Buddhahood, i.e. the true introspection by the Intellect free from attachment and of no hindrance, is understood, the acquisition will not take place, i.e. the realization of the Sphere of Nirvāṇa characterized as the liberation from all the impediments, just as we cannot see the disk of the sun without perceiving its light and rays.
Therefore, it is said: “O Lord, there is no acquisition of the Nirvāṇa for [those who maintain] the inferiority or superiority of [all] thc elements. The acquisition of the Nirvāṇa is, O Lord, available [only] to [those who know] the equality of all the elements. [In other words], O Lord, it is for those who have the Wisdom of equality, those who have the liberation of equality, or those who have attained the true introspection through the liberation of equality. Therefore, O Lord, it is said the Sphere of the Nirvāṇa is of unique taste, of equal taste. That is to say, [it is of one and the same] taste with Wisdom and Liberation”.
IX. THE 9 ILLUSTRATIONS ON THE GERM COVERED WITH DEFILEMENTS
The 9 Illustrations according to the Tathāgatagarbhasūtra. Thus have been explained the characteristics Of the Matrix of the Buddha from 10 aspects; Now, this Matrix, as concealed by the covering of dcfilcments Is to be known by the following illustrations. || 95 ||
Thus, with reference to the existence of the Essential Nature, as eternal as the ultimate limit [of the world], we have hitherto explained the characteristics of the Matrix of the Tathāgata from 10 points of View.And hereafter, with reference to the fact that the covering of defilcments is Essentially unconnected [with the Innate Mind] although aśociating with it since the beginninglcś time and the pure Essential Nature, likewise aśociating since the beginningless time, Essentially connected with it [as being its own nature], it should be understood, by illustrations based upon the Scripture, that the Matrix of the Tathāgata is concealed by the limitless coverings of defilements. Which are the 9 illustrations?
(Kārikās 27-57) Like the Buddha in an ugly lotus flower, Like honey surrounded by bees, Like kernels of grains covered by the husk, Like gold fallen into impurities, Like a treasure under the ground, Like a sprout, etc. grown from a small fruit, Like an image of the Buddha wrapped in a tattered garment. || 96 ||Like the kinghood in the womb of a poor woman, And like a precious statue in the earthen mould; In such away, there abides this Essence In the living beings obscured by occasional stains of defilements. || 97 ||[In these illustrations], pollutions are like A lotus flower, bees, husk, impurities and the ground, Like the bark of a fruit, like a tattered garment, Like a woman of misery, and like earth tormented by the fire of pains; And the Buddha, honey, cleaned kernels 16), gold, treasure, A Nyagrodha tree, a precious image, the Highest Lord of the world, And a purified precious statue, The excellent Essence has a resemblance to them. || 98 ||(I) The Defilements are like the ugly sheath of lotus flowers, and the Essence of the Tathāgata is akin to the Buddha. Suppose the Buddha, shining with a thousand marks [of virtue], Were abiding in the inside a faded lotus flower, And a man of immaculate divine sight would perceive him And release him from the sheath of petals of lotus; || 99 ||Similarly, the Lord, with his Buddha’s eyes, Perceives his own nature even in those who are in the lowest world, And, being immaculate, standing at the utmost limit and being full of Compassion, He releases them from the obscurations. || 100 ||Just as a person of divine sight perceives A faded and ugly lotus flower and the Buddha within it, And rends asunder the petals [in order to draw him out]; In the same way, the Lord perceives the world, The Matrix of the Buddha, covered with the sheath of stains, Desire, Hatred, etc., And kills its Obscurations because of Compassion. || 101 ||(II) The Defilements are like honey-bees, and the Essence of the Tathāgata is akin to thc honey. Suppose a clever person, having seen Honey surrounded by cloudy bees, And wishing to get it, with skillful means, Would deprive the bees completely of it; || 102 ||Similarly, the Great Sage, possessed of thc eyes of the Omniscience, Perceiving this Essence known as akin to honey, Accomplishes the non-connection of the Essence With the bees-like obscurations, completely. || 103 ||Just as a man who is desirous of getting honey Hidden by thousands, millions of bees, Drives the bees away and makes use of the honey as he wishes; In the same way, the immaculate Wisdom in the living beings Is like honey, and the Defilements are like bees; The Buddha, like that man, knows how to remove the stains. || 104 ||(III) The Defilements are like the outer husk, and the Essence of the Tathāgata is akin to the inner kernel. The kernel of grains covered with the husk Cannot be eaten by any person; Those who wish to utilize it as food and the like Take it out from the husk; || 105 ||Similarly, the Buddhahood in the living beings Is polluted with the stains of Defilements, And unless it is freed from the aśociation of stains of Defilements, It cannot perform thc Acts of Buddha in the Spheres. || 106 ||Just as the kernel of grains like rice, wheat, barley, etc., As long as it is unreleased from the husk and not cleaned well, Cannot be the sweet edible for the people; Similarly, the religious king residing in the living beings, Having his feature unreleased from the husk of Defilemcnts, Does not become one who can grant the pleasurable taste of the Doctrine, To the people who are affected by the hunger of Defilcments. || 107 ||(IV) The Defilements are like a dirty place filled with impurities, and the Essence of the Tathāgata is akin to gold. Suppose a traveller would happen to drop A piece of gold in a place filled with impurities, And the gold would stay there for many hundreds of years As it were, without changing its quality; || 108 ||Then a god possessed of immaculate divine eyes Would see it there and tell a man: Here is a piece of gold, fresh and the highest of precious things. You should purify it and make use of it as a treasure; || 109 ||Similarly, the Buddha perceives the quality of living beings Drowned in the Defilements which are like impurities, And pours the rain of the Doctrine over the living beings In order to wash off that dirt of defilements. || 110 ||Just as a god, perceiving a piece of gold, the most beautiful one, Fallen into a dirty place filled with impurities, Would show it to the people in order to purify it from dirt; In the same way, the Buddha, perceiving the treasure of the Buddha in the living beings Which is fallen into a big pit of impurities of defilements, Teaches the Doctrine to the living beings in order to purify the treasure. || 111 ||(V) The Defilements are like the underground, and the Essence of the Tathāgata is akin to a treasure of jewels. Suppose there were an inexhaustible treasure Under the ground within the house of a poor man; However this man might not know about that treasure, And the latter could not say to him ‘I am here’; || 112 ||Similarly, though there is a treasure of immaculate jewel, The inconceivable, inexhaustible properties in the mind, The living beings of the world, without knowing it, Constantly experience the suffering of poverty in various ways. || 113 ||Just as a treasure of jewels in the house of a poor man Would not say to him ‘I am here’ Nor the man could know ‘here is a treasure of jewels’; Likewise is the treasure of properties dwelling in the house of the mind, And the living beings are like a poor man; To enable those people to obtain this treasure, The Sage makes his appearance in the world. || 114 ||(VI) The Defilements are like the bark-covering [of a seed], and the Essence of the Tathāgata is akin to the germ within a seed. Just as the germ of a seed inside the fruit of trees Of Mango, Tāla, etc. is of an imperishable nature, And, being sowed in the ground, by contact with water, etc., Gradually attains the nature of the king of trees; || 115 ||In the same way, the pure Absolute Essence, abiding in the living beings, Covered by the sheath within the bark of the fruit of ignorance and the like, [Grows] gradually by the help of this and that virtue And obtains [finally] the state of the king of Sages. || 116 ||Conditioned by water, by the light of the sun, By air, soil, time and space, From within the husk of the fruit of the Tāla or mango There comes out a tree; Similarly, the germ of the seed of the Buddha, Residing within the bark of the fruit, the defilements of living beings, Thrives by the help of this and that virtue, Resulting in the tree of the Highest Truth. || 117 ||The Defilements are like a tattered garment, and the Essence of the Tathāgata is akin to a precious image. Suppose an image of the Buddha made of precious jewels Wrapped in the tattered garment of bad smell Were cast off on the road, and A god, perceiving it, would speak to travellers About this matter, in order to retrieve it; || 118 ||Similarly, the One who has eyes of no obstacle Perceives, even among those in the world of animals, The nature of the Buddha concealed by the stains of various kinds of Defilements, And, for the sake of its liberation [from Defilements], Provides the means [of deliverance]. || 119 ||Just as a god with divine eyes, seeing the Buddha’s image Wrapped in a bad-smelling garment, and rejected on the road, Would show it to the people in order to retrieve it; In the same way the Lord, perceiving even among animals, The Essence [of the Buddha] thrown on the road of transmigration, With the covering of the tattered garment of Defilements, Taught the Doctrine for the sake of its deliverance. || 120 ||The Defilements are like a pregnant woman and the Essence of the Tathāgata is akin to an Emperor contained in the Embryonal elements. Suppose an ugly woman without a protector Were abiding in an orphanage, And, bearing the glory of royalty as an embryo, Might not know the king in her own womb. || 121 ||The generation of worldly existence is like an orphanage, Like a pregnant woman are the impure living beings, And the immaculate Essence in them is like that embryo, Owing to the existence of which, they become possessed of protection. || 122 ||Just as a woman, whose body is covered with a dirty garment And having ugly features, experiences in an orphanage, The greatest pain when the king is in her womb; Similarly the living beings abiding in the house of misery, And whose mind is not quiet by the power of Defilements, Imagine themselves without a protector Though the good protectors are residing in their own bodies. || 123 ||(IX) The Defilements are like an earthen mould and the Essence of the Tathāgata is akin to a golden statue. Suppose a man who knows [how to make a statue], Seeing that the statue, filled with melted gold inside And covered with clay outside, had become cool, Would, for purifying the inner gold, remove the outer covering; || 124 ||Similarly, the One who has got the highest Enlightenment, Perceiving always the radiance of the Innate Mind And the occasionality of the stains, Purifies the world, which is like amine of jewels, from obstructions. || 125 ||Just as a statue made of pure, shining gold Would become cool within the earthen covering, And, knowing this, a skillful jewel-maker would remove the clay; In the same way the Omniscient perceives that The Mind, which is like pure gold, is quiescent, And, by means of a stroke [called] the method of teaching the Doctrine, He removes the obscurations. || 126 ||The summarized meaning of the illustrations is as follows: Inside a lotus flower, amidst bees, Inside the husk, impurities, and the ground, Within the bark of a fruit, within a tattered garment, In the womb of a woman, and inside clay, respectively, || 127 ||Like the Buddha, like honey, like the kernel of grains, Like gold, like a treasure, and like a tree, Like a precious image, like the Emperor, And like a golden statue, || 128 ||The Innate Mind of the living beings Which is pure from beginningless time, And is not bound by the covering of Defilements, Though being within them from the outset is thus illustrated. || 129 ||
In brief, by this explanation of the illustrations given in the Tathāgatagarbha-sūtra, there is shown the fact that, for all living beings, the defiling elements [which cover] over their mind from the beginningless time are [merely] of an accidental nature, whereas the purifying elements existing in the mind since beginningless time were born together [with the mind], and hence, they are of an indivisible nature.Therefore, it is said: “Owing to the impurities on the Mind, the living beings are defiled; owing to the Mind [itself], pure [by nature], they are purified”.
(§2. 9 Kinds of Defilements the Impurities on the Mind.) Here, which are the impurities on the Mind, with reference to which the 9 illustrations, a sheath of lotus flower, &c., have been explained? Desire, Hatred and Ignorance, and their intense outburst, [Ignorance in] the form of Impression The pollutions [which are to be removed by] The Path of Perception and that of Practice, And those remaining in the impure and the pure Stages [of Bodhisattva, respectively], || 130 ||These 9 kinds of [defilements] are illustrated By the example of the sheath of a lotus flower and others; In their variety, however, the coverings of Defilements Extend beyond the limit of extremity in number. || 131 ||
In brief, these 9 kinds of Defilements make always their appearance [ on the Essence of the Tathāgata] as the incidental [ attachment], although the latter is perfectly pure by nature, just like the sheath of a lotus flower [ covering] over the Buddha’s image, and other examples. What are the 9 Defilements?They are, namely: 1) the Defilement characterized as the dormant state of Desire; 2) the Defilement characterized as the dormant state of Hatred; 3) the Defilement characterized as the dormant state of Ignorance; 4) the Defilement characterized as the intense outburst of Desire, Hatred and Ignorance; 5) the Defilement contained in the Dwelling Place of Ignorance; 6) the Defilement to be extirpated by means of Perception; 7) the Defilement, to be extirpated by means of Practice; 8) the Defilement remaining in the impure Stage [of Bodhisattva]; & 9) the Defilement remaining in the pure Stage [of Bodhisattva].Now first of all, 1)-3), there are those Defilements which are in the bodies of those worldly people who are freed from Desire, and, being the causes of Forces which accumulate the motionless State, give rise to the Material and the Immaterial Sphere, and which are to be killed by means of the Supermundane Wisdom. These are here termed the Defilements characterized as the dormant state of Desire, Hatred and Ignorance.4) Next, we have those Defilements which exist in the bodies of those living beings who indulge in Desire and the rest, and which, being the cause of Forces that accumulate merit and demerit, give rise only to the Sphere of Desire, and are to be killed by means of the Wisdom, [obtained] through the Contemplation of Impurity, etc. They are called the Defilements characterized as the intense outburst of Desire, Hatred and Ignorance.Then, 5) there are those Defilements which are in the bodies of the Arhats, and, being the cause that produces the Immaculate Actions, result in the birth of the pure Body made of mind, and are to be killed by the Tathāgata’s Wisdom of Enlightenment. These are called the Defilements contained in the Dwelling Place of, Ignorance. There are two kinds of individuals who undergo training [on the Path]: a) the ordinary beings and b) the Saints. Now, 6) the Defilements which exist in the body of ordinary beings training on the Path and which are to be killed by the Wisdom [obtained through] the first Perception of the Transcendental Truth are termed the Defilements to be extirpated by means of Perception.And, 7) the Defilements which exist in the body of the Saints training on the Path and which are to be killed by the Wisdom [obtained through] the Transcendental Practice of the Truth according to their [Transcendental] Perception are called the Defilements to be extirpated by Practice.[Lastly there are two kinds of Defilements aśociating with Bodhisattwas]. 8) Those which are in the body of Bodhisattvas who have not reached the ultimate perfection, and which are the enemy to the Wisdom [attained] on the [first] Stages and are to be killed by means of the Wisdom [obtained through] the Practice of the Stages beginning with the 8th, these are called the Defilements remaining in the impure Stage [of Bodhisattva].9) The Defilements which exist in the body of Bodhisattvas who have reached the ultimate perfection, and which are the enemy to the Wisdom [attained through] the Practice on the (last) Stages beginning with 8th and are to be killed by means of the Wisdom [of the Buddha, obtained through] the Meditation called ‘the Diamond-like’, these are called the Defilements remaining in the pure Stage [of Bodhisattva].
These Nine Defilements, beginning with Desire, Being taken in short, respectively, Are illustrated by 9 examples, That of the sheath of a lotus flower and others. || 132 ||
And, if taken in detail, [these Defilements] which are differentiated into 84,000 groups, are as infinite as the Wisdom of the Tathāgata. On this point, therefore, it is said that the Matrix of the Tathāgata is concealed by the coverings of Defilements which extend beyond the limit of extremity in number.
(Variety of Living Beings according to their Defilements). The impurity [retained] in the ordinary beings, The Arhats, the individuals in training [on the Path], And the Bodhisattvas is [explained], respectively, By these four, one, two and two kinds of pollution. || 133 ||
----------
It has been said by the Lord that all living beings are possessed of the Matrix of the Tathāgata. Here, ‘all living beings’ are said to be, in short, fourfold: namely, I) the ordinary beings; 2) the Arhats; 3) the individuals in training [on the Path]; and 4) the Bodhisattvas. Their impurity, on account of [which they cannot identify themselves with] the Immaculate Sphere, is here explained by [the first] four, [the next] one (the 5th) and two (the 6th & 7th) and again by two (the 8th & 9th) kinds of Pollution,’01) respectively.
(§3. Concordance between the 9 lllustrations and the 9 Defilements.) Now, how should the resemblance of 9 Defilements be known, Desire and the rest, to the sheath of a lotus flower and others, respectively, and how should the similarity be understood between the Essence of the Tathāgata and [the examples], the Buddha’s image and the rest?
Just as the lotus flower born from the mud Is delightful in its first appearance, But later on [when it withers], it is no more attractive; Similar to it is the delight of Desire. || 134 ||Just as the honey-bees, being excited, Sting sharply [and cause pain]; In the same way, Hatred, being aroused, Produces suffering in the heart. || 135 ||Just as the kernel of rice and others Are concealed by the outside husk, Similarly, the perception of the Essential Truth Is hindered by the covering’09) of ignorance. || 136 ||Just as the impurities are somewhat disagreeable; Likewise those who have got rid of desire [Regard] Passion as something disagreeable, Being characterized as devoted to [such] Passion, The outburst of Passions is repulsive like impurities. || 137 ||Just as the people, because of their ignorance, Cannot obtain the treasure hidden under the ground, In a similar way, they cannot obtain the Buddhahood Hindered by the Dwelling Place of Ignorance. || 138 ||Just as a sprout and the like, growing gradually, Break out the husk of the seed, Similarly, by the Intuition of the Truth, Those Defilements are removed which are to be extirpated by Perception. || 139 ||Those who have destroyed the ground of conception of personallity Are following in the [Practice of the] Saintly Path; Therefore, their Defilements which are to be rejected By the Wisdom of Practice are said to be like a tattered garment. || 140 ||The stains remaining in the [first] Stages Are like the impurities of the receptacle of an embryo, And the non-discriminative Wisdom has a resemblance To the matured form of an embryo delivered from its covering. || 141 ||The stains connected with the [last] Stages Are known as being like the earthen mould, And are to be destroyed by the Wisdom of the Buddhas [Obtained through] Meditation called ‘the Diamondlike’. || 142 ||Thus the 9 pollutions, Desire and the rest, Have a resemblance to a lotus flower and others, And the Essence [of the Buddha], consisting of 3-fold nature, Bears a similarity to the Buddha and the rest. || 143 ||
(§4. The 3-fold Nature of the Essence, the Purifying Element within the Mind, and its Concordance with the 9 lllustrations.) The resemblance of the Matrix of the Tathāgata, being the cause for purifying the Mind, in 9-fold, i. e. to the image of the Buddha and so forth, is to be understood in the reference to the 3-fold Nature of the Matrix of the Tathāgata. What is the 3-fold Nature?
The Nature of this [Essence] is the Absolute Body, The Reality, as well as the Germ, Which is known by the examples, Three, one and five, [respectively]. || 144 ||
By the examples, i.e. those of the image of the Buddha, honey and the kernel [of grains], this Essence is to be understood as being of the nature of the Absolute Body. By one example, i.e. that of gold, its being of the nature of Reality, and by [the remaining] examples, i.e. those of the treasure, the tree, the precious image, the highest Lord of Universe, and the golden statue, its being of the nature of the Germ from which the kinds of Buddha’s Body are originated [is to be understood].
(a. Dharmakāya.) Here, how is the Absolute Body? The Absolute Body is to be known in aspects, [One] is the Absolute Entity which is perfectly immaculate, [The other] is its natural outflow, the teaching Of the profound [truth] and of the diverse guidance. || 145 ||
The absolute body of the Buddha is to be understood in aspects, [Namely], 1) the perfectly pure Absolute Entity itself, which is the acting sphere of Non-discriminative Wisdom; and this is to be known in the reference to the Truth realized by the Tathāgata through introspection.And, 2) the natural outflow of the perfectly pure Absolute Entity as the cause for its attainment, which produces the communication among other living beings according to their faculties in discipline. And this is to be known in the reference to the Truth as the doctrine to be taught.This teaching is again divided into two, owing to the difference of means for exposition of the Doctrine, whether subtle or extensive. Namely, 2)-1) the Code of Bodhisattva, the teaching by the profound means for exposition of the Doctrine referring to the Highest Truth, and 2)-2) the Aphorism, the Scripture in prose and verse, the Prophecy, the Verse, the Solemn Utterance, the Statement of subject matter, &c. which are the teaching by various kinds of means for exposition of the Doctrine and are related to the Empirical Truth.
Being supermundane, nothing can be given As an example for the Essence, in this world; Therefore, it is shown in its similarity To the [apparitional form of the] Buddha himself. || 146 ||[The Doctrine] taught by subtle, profound means Is to be known as being akin to honey of one taste, And taught by various kinds of means, As being similar to the kernel of various grains. || 147 ||
Thus, by examples, those of the image of the Buddha the honey and the kernel, in reference to the meaning that all living beings, with no exception, are penetrated by the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata, it is explained that these, all living beings, are the Matrix (interior) of the Tathāgata, (i.e. the Matrix in which the Tathāgata penetrates). Indeed, there is no one among the living beings who stands outside the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata, just as no kind of physical form can exist outside of space.Because it is said: “Just as space is considered to be all-pervading always, Similarly, it is held to be always all-pervading; Just as space pervades all visible forms, Similarly, it pervades all the multitudes of living beings”.
(b. Tathatā.) Being unchangeable, by nature, Sublime, and perfectly pure, Reality is illustrated By the analogy with a piece of gold. || 148 ||
That which is the Mind, though it is aśociated with the phenomena of Suffering [caused by] innumerable forms of Defilement, is unable to be shown as being alterable because of its being radiant by nature. Therefore, it is called ‘Reality’ in the sense of being unchangeable like excellent gold.This very Mind gets also the appellation of ‘the Tathāgata’ whenever it perfects the purification from all accidental pollutions even in the case of those living beings who are ranked among the groups in the definitely wrong way, since all of them are not different by nature. Thus, with reference to the sense that Reality is the undifferentiated whole, it is explained by the one example of gold, that the Tathāgata, being Reality, is [identical with] the Matrix (i.e. the inner Essence) of these living beings.Having in view [this] Innate Mind, the pure and non-dual Essential Nature, it is said by the Lord 153): “Here, O Mañjusrī, the Tathāgata is one who has the full knowledge about the root of his own substratum. Through his self-purification, he has understood the purity of living beings. That which is the purity of his own and that which is the purity of the living beings, these two are one and the same, they cannot be divided into two.[Also] it is said: “Though being undifferentiated among all, Reality, in case the purification is perfected, Is [called] Buddhahood; therefore, All living beings are possessed of the Matrix of Buddhahood”.
(c. Tathāgatagotra.) The Germ [of the Buddha] is known to be twofold, Being like a treasure and like a tree [grown] from a seed; The Innate [Germ] existing since the beginningless time And that which has acquired the highest development. || 149 ||From this twofold Germ, it is considered, The Bodies of the Buddha are obtained; From the first one, the first Body, And, from the second, the latter two. || 150 ||The Body of the Absolute Essence is pure And is known to be like the precious image, Since, by nature, it is non-artificial And is the substratum of precious properties. || 151 ||The [Body of] Enjoyment is like the Universal Lord Since it is the great Emperor of Religion; The Apparitional Body is like a golden statue Since is has the nature of being an image. || 152 ||
Thus, by these examples, namely, those of a treasure, a tree, a precious image, a Lord of the Universe, and a golden statue, in the reference to the nature as the Germ from which the Bodies of the Buddha are originated, it is said that ‘the Matrix (i.e. the inner Essence) of these living beings is the Essence (i.e. the cause) of the Tathāgata’.Indeed, the Buddhahood is usually manifested in the Bodies of the Buddha. Hence, it is said that the Essence of the Tathāgata is the cause for the acquisition of these [3 Bodies]. Here, the word ‘dhātu’ (Essence) is especially used in the sense of ‘hetu’ (a cause).So it is said: “And now, in every living being, there exists the Essence of the Tathāgata arisen, in the form of embryo. But these living beings do not know about it”. (Reference to the Abhidharma-sūtra on the ‘Essence’).
Indeed, it is said [in the Scripture] as follows: “The Essence that exists since beginningless time Is the foundation of all the elements, Owing to its existence, all Phenomenal Life, As well as the acquisition of Nirvāṇa exists”.
Here, how is it that ‘it exists since beginningless time’? With reference to this very Matrix of the Tathāgata, it has been taught and ascertained by the Lord: “An initial limit is not to be perceived”. About the.’Essence’ it is said as follows: “O Lord, this Matrix of the Tathāgata is the transcendental Matrix; the Matrix, perfectly pure by nature”.The statement ‘The foundation of all the elements’ means as follows: “Therefore, O Lord, the Matrix of the Tathāgata is the foundation, the support, and the substratum of the immutable elements (properties) which are Essentially connected with, indivisible from [the Absolute Entity], and unreleased from Wisdom. [At the same time], this very Matrix of the Tathāgata is also, O Lord, the foundation, the support, and the substratum of the [worldly] elements that are produced by causes and conditions, which are by all means disconnected, differentiated [from the Absolute Essence], and separated from Wisdom.The statement ‘Owing to its existence, there is all the Phenomenal Life’ means as follows: “Owing to the existence of the Matrix of the Tathāgata, there is Phenomenal Life, this, O Lord, is the proper saying on account of the Phenomenal Life”.The statement ‘There is also the acquisition of the Nirvāṇa’ is said in the following sense: “O Lord, if there were no Matrix of the Tathāgata, there would not take place aversion to Suffering, or arise desire, earnest wish, or prayer for Nirvāṇa”. &c.
X. THE ESSENTIAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE MATRIX OF THE TATHĀGATA
§1. The Saying: All Living Beings are Pośeśed of the Matrix of the Tathāgata is the Highest Logical Truth.) Now, this Matrix of the Tathāgata, being united with the Absolute Body, having the characteristics inseparable from Reality, and being of the nature of the germ properly fixed [towards the attainment of the Buddhahood], exists everywhere, at whatever time and without exception among the living beings, this is indeed to be perceived in the light of the Absolute Essence as the [highest] logical ground.It is said: “O noble youth, such is the Essential nature of the elements. Whether the Tathāgatas appear in this world, or whether they do not, these living beings are always possessed of the Matrix of the Tathāgata”.That which is meant by this ‘Essential nature’ is here synonymous for the ‘argument’, the mode of proof and the means [of cognition], in the sense: such is the real state of things and not otherwise. In any case only the Absolute Essence is the resort for the contemplation of the mind, only the Absolute Essence is the argument for the proper understanding of the mind. This Essence itself is not accessible to imagination nor to discrimination. It is accessible only to faith.
(§2. The Kinds of Individuals to Whom the Faith in this Essence is Necessary.) The Highest Truth of the Buddhas Can be understood only by faith, Indeed, the eyeless one cannot see The blazing disk of the sun. || 53 ||
In brief, there are four kinds of individuals who are defined as being blind with regard to the perception of the Matrix of the Tathāgata. Who are these four? They are namely: 1) the ordinary beings; 2) the Śrāvakas; 3) the Pratyekabuddhas; and 4) the Bodhisattvas who have recently entered the Vehicle.It is said: “O Lord, the Matrix of the Tathāgata is not the accessible sphere for those who have fallen into the erroneous conception maintaining the existence of individuality, for those who are attached to delusion, and for those whose mind has deviated from the conception of Non-substantiality”.Here, ‘those who have fallen into the erroneous conception maintaining the existence of individuality’ are the ordinary beings. Indeed, having fully admitted those elements claśified into [5] groups and others, which are possessed of Evil Influences, as being the real Ego and its belongings, they are clinging to the conception of ‘Ego’ and, ‘Mine’, and, due to this conception, they cannot believe even in the Immaculate Essence which represents the annihilation of the [conception of the] existence of real individuality.Being so, how is it pośible for them to cognize the Matrix of the Tathāgata which is the object accessible only to the Omniscient? There is [absolutely] no room for it. Now ‘those who are attached to delusion’ represent 2) the Śrāvakas and 3) the Pratyekabuddhas. Why?Because, although the Matrix of the Tathāgata is to be considered as ‘eternal’ in its transcendental sense, they indulge in the contemplation of the ‘evanescence’ [of the phenomena 30)] instead of meditating upon the ‘eternity’ of the former. Likewise, although the Matrix of the Tathāgata is to be considered as ‘blissful’ in its transcendental sense, still they indulge in the contemplation of the ‘suffering’ [of the phenomena] instead of meditating upon the ‘bliś’ of the former.Although the Matrix of the Tathāgata is to be regarded as ‘the [highest] Unity’ they nevertheless cling to the practice of meditation on the idea of ‘non-Ego’ [of the separate elements] instead of concentrating their mind on the notion of the Unity of the former. And, though the Matrix of the Tathāgata is to be considered as ‘pure’ in the transcendental sense, they devote themselves to the practice of meditation on the notion of the ‘impurity’ [of the Phenomenal World] without doing meditation on ‘Purity’ of the former.Thus, in such a way, all the Śrāvakas and Pratyekabuddhas are attached to the Path which is quite opposite to the realization of the Absolute Body, and hence the Essence [of the Tathāgata] which is characterized as the Supreme Eternity, the Supreme Bliss, the Supreme Unity, and the Supreme Purity, is said not to be accessible to them, too.About this inaccessibility of the Essence to those who are attached to delusion, i.e. who have the notion of Evenescence, Suffering, Impersonality and Impurity [as the almighty maximum], the Lord has made it clear in detail in the Mahāparinirvāṇa-sūtra with the example of a jewel in the water of a pond.
It runs as follows: “Suppose, for instance, O monks, that in the hot season, the people, putting on the bathing underwear, were playing in the water with various ornaments and equipments for their individual pastime. Suppose then, someone would cast into the water the genuine Vaiḍūrya stone. Thus, in order to get this Vaiḍūrya stone, all the people, leaving aside their ornaments, would dive into the water.They would mistake pebbles and gravels in the pond for the real jewel, seize them and draw them out, thinking: I have got a jewel. After having stood on the bank of the pond, they would notice: It is not the real jewel at all! At that moment, the water of that pond would, owing to the power of that jewel, shine as if water itself were shining, and seeing that water sparkling, they would say: O the jewel is still there [in the water], and would notice how that jewel had great quality.Thereafter, one who is experienced and clever would really get the jewel out. In the same way, O brethren, ye who are ignorant of the real Essence of things, maintaining the general conception that all things are evanescent, that there is only suffering, and that everything is impersonal and impure, practise the meditation [on that conception] repeatedly, and increasingly. But all that was attempted by you, [ye should keep in mind], is [in reality] of no use.Therefore, O monks, ye should become skilful in order not to be determined by this [false conception] like the pebbles and gravels in the pond. O monks, with those elements which ye maintain to be in every case evanescent, suffering, impersonal, and impure, and on which ye practise the meditation [on that notion] repeatedly and increasingly, there exists [an Essence which represents] the Eternity, the Bliss, the Purity, and the Highest Unity”. Thus should be understood in detail, according to the Scripture, the teaching of the incorrectness with regard to the feature of the highest true nature of the elements.
Lastly, ‘those whose mind has deviated from the conception of Non-substantiality’ denotes the Bodhisattvas who have recently entered the Vehicle, [since] they are deprived of [the cognition of] the Matrix of the Tathāgata in regard to the true meaning of Non-substantiality.They are the people who look toward Non-substantiality as the medium of Liberation in order to destroy the substance, thinking that the perfect Nirvāṇa means the Extinction, i.e. the destruction of the elements [for the Phenomenal Existence] in future.There are also some people among them who think that there is something substantial called ‘the Non-substantiality’ which is quite different from ‘form’ and other [elements], and that is the one which we should understand, upon which we should meditate, and, fancying Non-substantiality in this way, they are persuaded of Non-substantiality.
(§3. The True Conception of the Matrix of the Tathāgata as Representing Non-substantiality.) Then how is what is called here ‘[the cognition of] the Matrix of the Tathāgata in regard to the true meaning of Non-substantiality’? Here there is nothing to be removed And absolutely nothing to be added; The Truth should be perceived as it is, And he who sees the Truth becomes liberated. || 154 ||The Essence [of the Buddha] is [by nature] devoid Of the accidental [pollutions] which differ from it; But it is by no means devoid of the highest properties Which are, Essentially, indivisible from it. || 155 ||
What is explained by this? There is no defiling element which is to be removed from this Essence of the Tathāgata, perfectly purified by nature, since it is by nature devoid of accidental pollutions. Also, there is no purifying element which is to be added to it, since it is by nature indivisible from the pure properties [of the Buddha].On account of this point, it is said [in the Scripture]: “The Matrix of the Tathāgata is devoid of all the sheath of Defilements which are differentiated and separated [from the Absolute Essence]. The Matrix of the Tathāgata is by no means devoid of the Buddha’s Properties which are indivisible, inseparable [from the Absolute Essence], inconceivable and far beyond the sands of the Gaṅgā in number”.Thus, wherever something is lacking, this is observed as ‘void’ in that place, whatever remains there, one knows that this being must exist here: This is really the true [conception of Non-substantioality]. [Thus], by removing the extremities of affirmation and negation, the real characteristic of Non-substantiality is explained by these two verses.Now, those individuals whose mind has deviated from this principle of Non-substantiality, and, turning in various directions, neither meditates nor concentrates upon it, we call them by this very reason ‘those whose mind has deviated from [the true conception of] Non-substantiality. Indeed, without the introduction to the knowledge of the highest truth of Non-substantiality, nobody can attain or realize the non-discriminative Sphere [of the Tathāgata].Implying this point, it has been said: “The Wisdom cognizing the Matrix of the Tathāgata is nothing but the Wisdom about Non-substantiality of the Buddhas. And this Matrix of the Tathāgata has never been seen, has never been realized by the Śrāvakas and the Pratyekabuddhas” &c.Now, this Matrix of the Tathāgata, inasmuch as it represents the Matrix of the Absolute Essence, is said to be a sphere not accessible to ‘those who have fallen into the erroneous conception maintaining the existence of individuality’, because the Absolute Essence is an antidote against such erroneous conception.Inasmuch as it represents the Matrix of the Absolute Body, or the Matrix of the Transcendental Element, it is said not to be accessible to ‘those who are attached to delusion’ since the Transcendental Element is spoken of as being an antidote against the mundane elements of such nature as evanescence, etc.[Furthermore], inasmuch as it represents the Matrix of the properties, perfectly pure by nature, [the Matrix of the Tathāgata] is said not to be accessible to ‘those whose mind has deviated from Non-substantiality’ since the [Buddha’s] pure virtuous Properties, being represented by the Transcendental Absolute Body which is indivisible from them, are by nature devoid of accidental pollutions.Here, to perceive that the Transcendental Absolute Body is perfectly pure by nature, by means of the cognition of the unique introduction to the Wisdom which is Essentially connected with the Absolute Essence, implies here the True Intuition. On account of this perception, it is said that [even] those Bodhisattvas who are abiding in their 10 Stages can [but] slightly understand the Matrix of the Tathāgata.Indeed, thus it is said: “[ O Lord], thou art unable to be seen fully, Just as here the sun, in the sky with torn clouds, Even by the Saints, of pure intellectual vision, Since their intellect is still partial; O Lord, only those whose Wisdom is illimitable Can completely perceive thy Absolute Body Which pervades everything knowable That is infinite like space”.
XI. THE PURPOSE OF INSTRUCTION
[Someone may ask]: If this Essence [of the Buddha] is thus so difficult to be cognized inasmuch as it is not fully accessible even to the Saints of the Highest rank who are abiding on the Stage characterized as being completely free from any attachment, then what is the use of this instruction to the ignorant and ordinary beings? [For replying to this question], we have two ślokas summarizing the purpose of instruction. [Of them], one is the question, and the second is the answer.
(Kārikās 58-59) It has been said here and there [in the Scriptures] That all things are to be known everywhere As being ‘unreal’, like clouds, [visions in] a dream, and illusions; Whereas, why has the Buddha declared here That the Essence of the Buddha, exists ‘in every living being? || 156 ||There are defects [caused by the previous teaching]: The depressed mind, contempt against those who are inferior, Clinging to things unreal, speaking ill of Truth, And besides, affection for one’s self. [The teaching about Essence of the Buddha] has been taught In order that those who are possessed of these defects Might get rid of their defects. || 157 ||The meaning of these two ślokas is briefly to be known by the following ten verses. It has been said [in the Scriptures] All kinds of phenomena, made by causes and conditions And known in the forms of Defilement, Action and Result, Are, like clouds, etc., deprived of reality. || 158 ||The Defilements are like the clouds, Undertaking of Actions is like the enjoyment in a dream; Being the Results made by Defilements and Actions, The Group of elements are like illusions made by magic. || 159 ||So has it been ascertained ‘before’; But now, in this ‘ultimate’ Doctrine, In order to remove the defects [caused by the previous teaching], It is shown that the Essence of the Buddha exists. || 160 ||Indeed, if [the people] have not heard of this teaching, Some of them, being possessed of depressed mind, May have a fault of self-depreciation, and hence, The Will towards the Enlightenment does never arise in them. || 161 ||Even if someone has resolved towards Enlightenment, Then he, being proud of it, saying: I am superior to [others], Will produce the notion of inferiority for those Whose mind is not aroused towards Enlightenment. || 162 ||With him who thinks like that, The true knowledge will never arise, and hence, He clings to unreal things [as if they were real] And does not cognize the true meaning. || 163 ||[Indeed], the defects of living beings are unreal Because they are non-genuine and accidental But the non-substantiality of such defects is real, That is, the virtues [of living beings], pure by nature. || 164 ||If a man of intelligence perceives [only] That the defects [of living beings] are unreal, And depreciates [their] virtues which are real, He cannot obtain benevolence by which One regards [other] living beings as equal to oneself. || 165 ||On the contrary, if one hears of this teaching, There arises in him great exertion, Respect [for all living beings] as for the Teacher, Intuition, Wisdom, and great Benevolence; These properties having become originated, || 166 ||He, being free from [self-] depreciation, Obtaining equal regard [for every body], Being devoid of defects and possessed of virtues, Having love, equally for himself and for living beings, Attains the State of Buddha at an early date. || 167 ||
Finished is the first Chapter entitled ‘the Matrix of the Tathāgata’ in the ANALYSIS OF THE GERM OF THE JEWELS, a Treatise on the Ultimate Doctrine of the Great Vehicle, with the commentary [named] ‘the Summary of Meaning of the ślokas’.
CHAPTER II. THE ENLIGHTENMENT
XII. GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE REALITY FREE FROM POLLUTIONS
We have finished the explanation of ‘the Reality mingled with Pollutions’. Hereafter, we shall speak of the undefiled Reality. Now, what is this ‘Reality free from Pollutions’? It is that which is called ‘the Perfect Manifestation of the Basis (i.e. the Germ of the Buddha)’, since, in the Immaculate Sphere of the Buddhas, [this Reality] is [absolutely] freed from all kinds of pollutions. And this undefiled Reality is to be known in brief in the reference to the 8 categories [which show its characteristics].
Then which are the 8 categories? [The Buddhaland is] the purity, the attainment, The liberation [from obscurations], The action on behalf of oneself and others, And the foundation of these two kinds of actions; Being profound, magnificent and magnanimous, It [manifests itself] as long as the world exists, In a manner as it is. || 1 ||
Thus, by this verse, these 8 subjects are indicated according to order; namely: 1) the own nature; 2) the cause; 3) the result; 4) the function; 5) the union; 6) the manifestation; 7) the eternal, and 8) the inconceivable character [of Manifestation].1) First of all the Essence [of the Buddhahood], which is called by the Lord ‘the Matrix of the Tathāgata’ when it is unreleased from the sheath of defilements, is to be understood, when it is ‘perfectly purified as the ‘own-nature’ of the [Reality] characterized as the ‘Perfect Manifestation of the Basis’. It is said: “O Lord, one who has no doubt about the Matrix of the Tathāgata as it is concealed under the millions of coverings of all defilements , shall likewise have no doubt about the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata which is freed from the coverings of all defilements”.2) There are two kinds of knowledge. One is the ‘Supermundane, non-discriminative [Wisdom]’ and the other, the Mundane Wisdom which is acquired afterwards [based on the former] This supermundane and mundane Wisdom is the ‘cause’ of the Perfect Manifestation of the Basis, and is indicated by the word ‘attainment’. [Here] it is called ‘attainment’ in the sense ‘that by which something is attained’.3) The ‘result’ [obtained by] these [two kinds of Wisdom] is the liberation. There are two kinds of liberation, viz. the liberation from the obscurations of defilement, and the liberation form the obscuration on account of the knowable things, respectively. 4) The ‘function’ is the accomplishment of one’s own aim and that of others.5) [The point that] the foundation of this function is ‘provided with’ [the immeasurable properties] is [here called] ‘union’. 6)-8) The. Manifestation means that [this Perfect Manifestation of the Basis] manifests itself in the forms of three Bodies of the Buddha which are characterized by profundity, magnificence, and magnanimity, respectively, and [manifests] ‘eternally’ i.e. ‘as long as the world exists’ and in an ‘inconceivable’ manner.
Summary. The own nature, the cause, and the result, The function, the union, and the manifestation, Its eternal and inconceivable character; By these points, there is the establishment [of the Essence] In Buddhas’ Stages. || 2 ||
XIII. 8 POINTS ON THE UNDEFILED REALITY
Now, we have one śloka on Buddhahood and the means for its attainment referring to the subjects of ‘own nature’ and ‘cause’ respectively.
(Kārikā 1) Buddhahood has been spoken of as being radiant by nature, [However] as being covered with the net of the multitude of clouds, In the form of [obstructions on account of] defilements And knowable things which are of accidental nature, Just as the sun and the sky [are often interrupted by clouds Though they are radiant and immaculate, respectively]; This Buddhahood is now eternal, everlasting and constant, Being endowed with all the pure properties of the Buddha, And is attained when the elements [of existence] take resort To the Non-discriminative and Analytical Wisdom. || 3 ||
The meaning of this śloka is to be known in brief by the [following] verses.
Buddhahood, which is represented by The indivisible virtuous properties, Has a resemblance to the sun and the sky In both its characters, knowledge and removal. || 4 ||It is endowed with all the properties of the Buddha, Which are beyond the sands of the Gaṅgā in number, And are radiant and of uncreated nature, And whose manifestations are indivisible [from itself]. || 5 ||Because of their being unreal by nature, Because of their pervadingness and occasionality, The obstructions of defilements and of ignorance Are illustrated as being like clouds. || 6 ||The cause of diśolving these two obstructions is Wisdom, Which is again considered as of two kinds, One is the Non-discriminative [Wisdom] And the other is the knowledge, obtained afterwards. || 7 ||
(III. PHALA) It is said that the ‘own nature’ of the Perfect Manifestation of the Basis is the ‘perfect purity ‘. This purity is here, in short, of two kinds. Namely, I) the ‘innate purity’; and 2) ‘the purity, as the result of purification’.Of them, 1) ‘the innate purity’ represents that which is Essentially free [from all stains] but actually aśociated with them, [i.e. Reality mingled with pollutions]. Indeed, the Innate Mind, though being radiant, is not [always] separated from the accidental pollutions. 2) ‘The purity, as a result of purification’ represents [that which is] Essentially free and actually, too, liberated from [all pollutions]. Because, just as water and the like become purified from dirt, impurities, etc., the radiant Innate Mind is completely liberated from the accidental pollutions.
Now we have two ślokas about ‘the Purity, as a result of purification’ with reference to the subject of ‘result’. (Kārikās 2-3) Like a pond, filled with pure water, Becomes abundant with flowering lotus gradually, Like the full moon delivered from the jaws of Rāhu, Like the sun, whose rays have been released From the covering of clouds and others, This [Buddhahood], being endowed with pure properties, Manifest itself as being liberated. || 8 ||This Buddhahood is [also] like the Highest of Sages, Like honey, like the kernel [of corns], like gold, Like a precious store of jewels, like a great fruit-tree, Like an immaculate precious image of the Buddha, Like the Highest Lord of the world, And like a golden statue 24). || 9 ||
----------
The meaning of these two ślokas, in short, is to be known by the following 8 verses: The result of the Non-discriminative Wisdom In short, is said to be akin to a pond and others, Being pure [as the result of the removal] of Desire and other accidental defilements. || 10 ||[On the other hand], the result of Wisdom, Attained on the basis of the former, is explained As the actual sight of the Buddha’s state Pośeśed of all kinds of excellency. || 11 ||It is like a pond filled with shining water Because of its rejecting the dirtiness of the dust of Desire, And because of its sprinkling the water of meditation On the disciples who are like lotus flowers. || 12 ||It has a resemblance to the immaculate full moon, Since it has been released from the Rāhu of Hatred And since it pervades all the world With the rays of Great Love and Compassion. || 13 ||And this Buddhahood is similar to the immaculate sun, Because of its being free from the clouds of Ignorance, And because of its removing the darkness of the world With the rays of its divine Wisdom. || 14 ||Being possessed of the unequalled properties, Bringing forth the Essence of the Highest Doctrine, And being free from the outer covering [of Defilements], It is like the Buddha, like honey and the kernel [of grains]. || 15 ||Being pure, being freed from the poverty By the richness of its properties, And being the giver of the fruit of Liberation, It is like gold, like a treasure, and a tree, [respectively]. || 16 ||By its body’s being made of the jewel of the Doctrine, Its being the Highest Lord of the human beings, And its having the appearance of the most precious form, It is like a precious [image], a king and a golden statue. || 17 ||
(IV. KARMAN) It has been said that the two kinds of Wisdom, viz. the supermundane Non discriminative Wisdom and the mundane knowledge, obtained afterwards on the basis of the former, are the cause of the Perfect Manifestation of the Basis, which is called ‘the result of the liberation’ and the ‘function’ of the Wisdom is the fulfillment of one’s own aim and of that of others.Then, what is the ‘fulfillment of one’s own aim and of that of others’? That which represents the attainment of the undefiled Absolute Body, as being freed from the obstructions due to Defilements and knowable things along with their potential forces is called the ‘fulfillment of one’s own aim ‘. And that which comes after the attainment of the fulfillment of one’s own aim, and represents the manifestation, by means of twofold power, viz. I) appearance in the forms of two bodies; and 2) the teaching by means of them, [both of] which continue as long as the world exists, without any effort, it is called the ‘fulfilment of the aim of others’.
About this fulfillment of one’s own aim and of that of others, with reference to the subject ‘function’ we have three ślokas. (Kārikās 4-6) Buddhahood, being the foundation, Immaculate and all-pervading, Of unperishable nature, and everlasting, Quiescent, constant and unchangeable, Is, like space, the cause for the Intelligent To experience the objects through sense-organs. || 18 ||It gives always the cause [for enjoyment] In showing the miraculous apparitional forms, In the pure audition of its perfect preaching, In the pure scent of the Buddhas’ morality, In tasting of the taste of the great, sublime and highest Doctrine, || 19 ||In the enjoyment of the pleasurable touch of meditation, And in the cognition of doctrine, profound by its nature; [But], being the Highest Truth, the thicket of quite subtle thinking, The Tathāgata himself, like space, is of no visible mark. || 20 ||The meaning of these three ślokas, in brief, is to be known by the following 8 verses. The function of the twofold Wisdom In short, is to be known as follows: [One is] the fulfillment of the Body of [innate] liberation, [The other is] the purification of the Absolute Body. || 21 ||The Body of innate liberation and the Absolute Body, [Although] being two [in their functions], are to be known as one, Because they are free from passions and all-pervading, And are the immaculate substratum. || 22 ||It is ‘free from passions’ Since the Defilements are resisted along with impressions; Wisdom is considered as ‘pervading’ Since it has neither attachment nor hindrance. || 23 ||The ‘absolute immutability’ is caused By its nature of imperishability, [Here] ‘imperishability’ is a general statement, Which is explained by the words, ‘everlasting’ etc. || 24 ||The ‘Evanescence’ is to be known as of four kinds, Being the counterparts of ‘everlasting’ and the rest, [They are namely]: ‘putridity’, ‘disease’, ‘Annihilation’ and ‘death in an inconceivable way’. || 25 ||Because of their absence, it is known to be ‘Everlasting’, ‘quiescent’, ‘constant’ and ‘unchangeable’ And this immaculate Wisdom is the ‘substratum’ Since it is the support of [all] the pure elements. || 26 ||Just as space, being itself of no cause, Is the cause of perceiving, hearing and so on Of form, of sounds, of tastes, of smells, Of things touchable and of substances respectively, || 27 ||In the same way, the twofold [apparitional] Body, On account of its connection with the undefiled character, Is the cause for wise men to give rise to Immaculate virtues in the objects of sense-organs. || 28 ||
(V. YOGA) It is said that the Buddha has the character of space. This refers specially to the absolute and exclusive character of the Buddha. So it is said: “If the Tathāgata could be recognized merely by the 32 marks of a superman, the universal monarch, too, would turn to be a Buddha”.
Now, there is one śloka about the highest character in reference to the subject of ‘union’. (Kārikā 7) Being inconceivable, eternal and ever-lasting, Being quiescent, constant, and perfectly pacified, Being all-pervading and apart from discrimination, The pure and immaculate Buddhahood is like space, It has neither attachment nor hindrance anywhere, And, being devoid of rough sensation, It can be neither perceived nor cognized. || 29 ||Now, the meaning of this śloka is, in short, to be known by the following 8 verses. The [fulfillment of] one’s own aim and of that of others Are represented by the Bodies of Liberation and of the Absolute; On this foundation of one’s own aim and of that of others There is the ‘union’ of properties, ‘inconceivable’ and others. || 30 ||Buddhahood is accessible only to the Wisdom of the Omniscient, And is not the object of the [kinds of ordinary] knowledge, Therefore, it is to be known as ‘inconceivable’ [Even] for those people of intellect. || 31 ||Being of subtle character, it is not the object of study, Being the Highest Truth, it is not the object of thought, And, being the impenetrable Absolute Essence, It is not accessible to the mundane meditation and the like, || 32 ||Because it has never been seen before by ordinary persons, Like the visible forms for those who are born blind, nor even by the Saints, Like the disk of the sun for infants lying in their mother’s bed. || 33 ||It is ‘eternal’, as it is devoid of birth; It is ‘everlasting’ since it does not disappear; It is ‘quiescent’ because it is free from dualism, And is ‘constant’ because of endurance of Reality. || 34 ||It is ‘perfectly pacified’ as being the Truth of Extinction, It is ‘all-pervading’, since it cognizes everything ; It is ‘non-discriminative’ as it has no insistence; And ‘has no attachment’ since it rejects defilements. || 35 ||Being purified from all the obscurations of Ignorance, It ‘has no hindrance’ in regard to everything [knowable]; Being of soft and light-moving nature, It is ‘devoid of rough sensation’. || 36 ||Being immaterial, it cannot be perceived, And being of no [visible] mark, it is ‘incognizable’; It is ‘pure’ since it is pure by nature, And is ‘immaculate’ because of its removal of pollutions. || 37 ||
(VI. VÙTTI) Now again it should be known that this Buddhahood, due to its pośession of properties uncommon to others, manifests itself, though by means of a manifestation which is inseparable from its immutable qualities like space, still in the forms of three immaculate bodies, viz. ‘the Body of Absolute Essence’, ‘the Body of Enjoyment’, and ‘the Apparitional Body’ with various inconceivable appliances like the Great skilful means, Great Compassion, and Wisdom, in order to be the support of the welfare and happiness of all living beings, as long as the world exists, without cessation, without interruption, and with no effort.
So, with reference to this subject of ‘manifestation’ there are ślokas about the distinction of [three kinds of] Buddha’s Body. (Kārikās 8-11) That which has neither beginning, middle nor end, Is indivisible, non-dual, liberated in three ways, Immaculate and non-discriminative,… That represents the nature of the Absolute Essence, And is perceived by the Saints, Who are concentrating their mind, striving after it; || 38 ||This [Absolute Essence] is nothing but the pure Essence of the Tathāgatas, Which is endowed with properties, inconceivable, unequalled, Innumerable, and surpaśing the sands of the Gaṅgā in number And has rooted out all the defects along with impressions. || 39 ||One who exerts in concentrating for the liberation of the world, With the body in the form of different coloured rays of the Highest Doctrine, Has a resemblance, in his acts, to the king of wish-fulfilling gems, Appearing in various forms, which, however, have not their own substance 99). || 40 ||That which is the cause, in various worlds, For advancing into the Quiescent Path, For bringing to full development and for giving prophecy, That is the Apparitional Form [of the Buddha], Which also abides always in the Absolute Essence, As the visible forms in the element of space. || 41 ||The summarized meaning of these ślokas are to be known by the following 20 verses: That which is called Buddhahood Is the Omniscience of the Self-born, The highest Nirvāṇa, and the inconceivable Arhatship, Which is realized through self-introspection. || 42 ||This [Buddhahood] manifests itself in the variety Of three Bodies, the Body of the Absolute Essence, etc., Represented by the quality of Profundity, Of Magnificence, and of Magnanimity, [respectively]. || 43 ||(a. The Body of the Absolute Essence.) Here, the Body of the Absolute Essence Of the Buddha, in short, is to be known As of five characteristics, And being possessed of five kinds of properties. || 44 ||It is ‘immutable’ and ‘indivisible’ Is ‘devoid of the two extremities’ And is ‘delivered from the Obstructions’ Of defilement, ignorance and distraction. || 45 ||Being free from all stains and thought-construction, And being accessible to the Saints, It is ‘radiant and pure’ Owing to the nature of the Absolute Essence. || 46 ||‘Immeasurable’, ‘innumerable’, ‘inconceivable’, ‘incomparable’ And representing ‘the highest point of purity’; The Body of the Absolute Essence is endowed With these [5] kinds of virtuous qualities. || 47 ||Being magnificent and numberless, Being inaccessible to investigation, Being unique and devoid of the defiling forces, It is ‘immeasurable’ and so on, respectively. || 48 ||(b. The Body of Enjoyment.) It manifests itself the Doctrine, owing to its nature Of enjoying the Doctrine in various forms; Being the natural outflow of pure Compassion, It works uninterruptedly for the sake of living beings; || 49 ||It fulfils the aim according to the wish Without thought-construction and with no effort; [By these points] the Body of Enjoyment is characterized Due to its power like that of the wish-fulfilling gems. || 50 ||In teaching, in the visible form, in acting ceaselessly, And acting with no artificial effort, And in its appearance of illusion, The variety of [its manifestation] is said to be 5-fold. || 51 ||Just as a gem, being dyed with various colours, Does not make manifest its real Essence; Similarly, the Lord never shows its real nature, Though it appears in various forms, according to the conditions of the living beings. || 52 ||(c. The Apparitional Body.) [The Buddha], being the knower of the world, Perceiving fully the world, with Great Compassion, Manifests himself in various apparitional forms, Without being separated from his Absolute Body. || 53 ||The [various] previous births, The birth in the Tuṣita-heaven, and descent from it, The entrance into the womb, and the birth [in this world], The skilfulness in various arts and works, || 54 ||Pleasurable entertainments among ladies in the harem, The renouncement of the world, practice of asceticism, passage to the Excellent Seat of Enlightenment, The conquest over the army of Evil Demons, || 55 ||The [acquisition of] Enlightenment, Setting into motion the wheel of the Doctrine, And the departure into Nirvāna; . . . all of them He shows in the impure worlds, as long as they exist. || 56 ||[The Buddha], the knower of means, creates an aversion To the Three Worlds among the living beings By the words, ‘evanescent’, ‘suffering’, ‘non-substantial’; And by the word ‘quiescent’ he leads them into Nirvāṇa. || 57 ||Those who have entered the way to Quiescence, And who imagine that they have attained Nirvāṇa, Them he diverts from their former prejudice, Through the teaching of the True Doctrines In the Saddharmapuṇḍarīka and other Sūtras, And, embracing Wisdom and Skilful Means, Makes them mature in the Ultimate Vehicle, And gives prophecy for them to attain the Highest Enlightenment. || 58-59 ||Being subtle, accomplishing the power And toiling excessively for the company of ordinary beings, In these points [the Buddha] should be known, respectively, As the Profound, the Magnificent and the Magnanimous. || 60 ||Here, the first Body is the Absolute Body, And the latter two are the Bodies in visible forms, These latter appear on the basis of the former, As the visible forms appear in space. || 61 ||(VII. NITYA) Now this threefold Body made manifest in order to be the support for the weal and happiness of the world, has an ‘eternal’ character [in its manifestation]. With reference to this subject, we have one śloka. (Kārikā 12) Having infinite causes [for the attainment of his state], Having an endless number of living beings to convert, Being endowed with Compassion, Miraculous Powers, Wisdom and Bliss, Governing all the elements, vanquishing the demon of Death, And representing non-substantiality, The lord of the World is eternal. || 62 ||The summarized meaning of this [śloka] is to be known by the following verses. Casting off his body, life and property, He has preserved the Highest doctrine; For the benefits of all living beings, He fulfills his first vow. || 63 ||In his Buddhahood, there is made manifest Compassion, pure and immaculate, He shows his [four] bases of Miraculous Powers, By which power he abides in the world; || 64 ||Owing to his Wisdom, he is liberated from The dualistic conception of Saṃsāra and Nirvāṇa; By his constant practice of the inconceivable meditation, He partakes of the complement of bliss, || 65 ||While he is acting, in the world, He is unaffected by the worldly elements; Having attained the state of quiescence and immortality, He leaves no room for [the activity of] the demon of Death; || 66 ||Being of an immutable nature, The Lord is perfectly pacified from the outset; And he gives a refuge for those who have no shelter, Because of these [10] points, he is ‘eternal’. || 67 ||The first of these motives show The eternity of the Preceptor in his Apparitional Body, The latter demonstrate the eternity From the viewpoint of the Absolute Body. || 68 ||Now, this method of attainment [of Buddhahood] by the Buddhas, which represents the ‘Perfect Manifestation of the Basis’ is to be understood as of inconceivable character. With reference to this ‘ inconceivability’, we have one śloka. (Kārikā 13) Being unutterable, containing the Highest Truth, Inaccessible to investigation and incomparable, Being the supreme, and relating neither To the Phenomenal World nor to Nirvāṇa, The sphere of Buddha is inconceivable even for the Saints. || 69 ||The summerized meaning of this [śloka] is to be understood by the following verses. It is ‘inconceivable’ since it is unutterable It is ‘unutterable’ since it is the Highest Truth, It is ‘the Highest Truth’ since it cannot be constructed by thought. It is ‘beyond investigation’ since it is incomparable; || 70 ||It is ‘incomparable’ since it is the supreme. It is ‘the supreme’ since it is not included; [Either in the Phenomenal World or in Nirvāṇa]; ‘Not included’ means the Buddha abides in neither of the two And never regards [in a one-sided manner] That Nirvāṇa is of merit and the other of defect. || 71 ||Being subtle by the [first] motives He is inconceivable in his Absolute Body, And by the 6th, on account of his Apparitional Body, He is inconceivable because of no identification. With either Nirvāṇa, or Phenomenal World. || 72 ||Being endowed with the Highest Wisdom, With the Great Compassion and other virtues, The Buddha, who has attained the ultimate point of virtue, Is inaccessible to human thought; Therefore, this final stage of the Buddha Is unknown even to the Great Sages Who have attained the stage of Initiation. || 73 ||
Finished is the second chapter entitled ‘the Enlightenment’ in the ANALYSIS OF THE GERM OF THE JEWELS, a Treatise on the Ultimate Doctrine of the Great Vehicle.
CHAPTER III. THE PROPERTIES OF THE BUDDHA
XIV. GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE BUDDHA’S PROPERTIES
We have finished the explanation of ‘the Reality free from Pollutions’. Hereafter, we shall speak of the ‘Properties’, which are based upon the Reality and are perfectly pure, being indivisible from Reality by nature as the brightness, colour and shape of the jewel are inseparable from the latter.
Therefore, immediately after [the exposition of the Reality], we have one śloka referring to the distinct characteristics of the Buddha’s Properties. (Kārikā 1) The aim of one’s own and that of others, [Consists in] the Body of the Highest Truth. And the Worldly Emanations based upon it; Representing the state of Liberation and Maturation, The result is endowed with Properties, Which appear in 64 varieties. || 1 ||What is told by this śloka? The Body which represents the Highest Truth Is the support for the completion of one’s own [aim] And the support for the fulfillment of others’ [aim] Is the Emanational Body of the Buddha. || 2 ||The first Body is endowed with properties, [10] Powers and so forth, as [the result of] Liberation, And the second one, with [32] marks of superman, As the properties [obtained by] the Maturation [which follows after Liberation]. || 3 ||
XV. 64 PROPERTIES OF THE BUDDHA
Hereafter, the text refers to which are the [10] Powers and other properties and how they are to be understood. Summary.
(Kārikā 2) The Powers [of the Buddha] are like a thunderbolt, In [breaking] the hindrance caused by ignorance, His Intrepidity in the aśemblage is like that of a lion, The Buddha’s exclusive properties are like space, And the two kinds of corporeal forms of the Lord are Like the moon and its reflection in the water. || 4 ||
----------
(I. THE 10 POWERS) It is said that the Buddha is possessed of [10] Powers. (Kārikās 3-4) The knowledge of the proper and improper place, Of the result of former actions, and of the faculties, Of the component elements and of the faith, Of the path which leads to everywhere. || 5 ||Of the impurity and purity in contemplation, etc., Of the memory of the previous abodes, Of the Divine Eyes, and of Quiescence, Such are the ten kinds of Power [of the Buddha]. || 6 ||It is said, [these Powers are] like a thunderbolt. (Kārikā 5) [Being the power of knowing] about the proper and the improper, About results, about elements and various faiths of the people, About the path, purity and impurity, About the complex of faculties, the memory of former abodes, About the divine eyes, and how to destroy the Evil Influences; The Powers pierce, break and cut down The armour, the mountain fortress, and the tree of ignorance, Therefore, they have resemblance to a thunderbolt. || 7 ||(I. THE FORMS OF INTREPIDITY) It is said that [the Buddha] has attained the kinds of intrepidity. (Kārikās 67) [The Buddha’s] Intrepidity is of four kinds, namely: In his perfect Enlightenment of all the elements, In rejecting all obstacles, In preaching the Path, and in acquiring the Extinction. || 8 ||He himself knows and causes others to know All the things cognizable in all their forms; He destroys everything to be rejected and causes others to reject them; Serves [himself and lets others serve] in the method to be practiced; And himself attains and causes others to attain The Highest and Perfectly Pure State which is to be attained; Thus, teaching the Truth on account of himself and of others, The Buddha, wherever he might be, is not paralyzed by fear. || 9 ||It is said that [the intrepidity of the Buddha] is like [that of] a lion. (Kārikā 8) Just as the king of beasts in the forest Has always no fear and acts without fear among beasts, Similarly, the lion who is the Lord of Sages Abides among the assembly of attendance, Imdependent, indifferently, with firmness and victory. || 10 ||(III. THE 18 EXCLUSIVE PROPERTIES) It is said that the Buddha is endowed with the 18 Exlusive Properties peculiar only to him. (Kārikā 9-13) With the Preseptor, There is neither error nor rough speech, Neither loss of memory nor distraction of mind, Also, there is no pluralistic conception; || 11 ||He is not indifferent, not without consideration, He knows no deprivation of his zeal, and of his energy, Of his memory, of Trancendental Intellect, and of Liberation, And of the intuition of this liberation; || 12 ||His [three kinds of] acts are preceded by Wisdom, And his Intuition acts unimpededly in three states of time; These 18 and others are the Properties Of the Preceptor, which are not common to others. || 13 ||The Sage has neither error nor rough speech, Neither loses [his memory] nor distracts his mind, Has neither pluralistic views nor indifference to one’s own taste, He is never deprived of his zeal, effort and memory, Of pure, immaculate Intellect and Liberation, Of the intuition of freedom and of showing all things knowable; || 14 ||He makes manifest on the objects the kinds of acts, Which are preceded by all kinds of knowledge, And brings out the Wisdom, well extensive, without hindrance, Constantly, throughout the states of time; Thus is Buddhahood, endowed with Great Compassion, And perfectly realized by the Buddha; And on account of this realization, he sets in motion in the world The great wheel of the fearless Supreme Doctrine. || 15 ||It is said that [these properties are] like space. (Kārikā 14) The nature found in the earth and the rest Is not the nature of space, And the properties of space represented by Non-obstruction, etc., are absent in material things; The earth, water, fire, wind and the sky, likewise, Are common to all the [material] worlds, But the Exclusive Properties of the Buddha Are not in the least common to those worlds. || 16 ||(II. THE 32 MARKS OF THE SUPERMAN) It is said that the Buddha is possessed of the corporeal form endowed with the 32 marks of the Superman. (Kārikās 15-23) The feet are firmly placed, marked by circles on the soles, And with broad insteps and leveled heels which hide the ankles, The fingers are long, and those of hands and toes alike Are connected with each other by a web. || 17 ||His skin is soft and fine like that of youths, His body is round with elevated parts, His shanks are like those of the deer, and The private parts are concealed as with an elephant. || 18 ||The upper part of the body is like that of a lion, The parts between the shoulders are closely set and elevated, And his shoulders are well heaped and round; His arms are fleshy, tender and of no unevenness, || 19 ||And are hanging low [down to the knees]. The body has a radiant, pure halo around it, His neck is immaculate like a white conch, And his jaws have a resemblance with those of a lion. || 20 ||He has forty teeth all of which are equal, And are clear and closely set, pure and straight, And his eye-teeth are white and of excellent form. || 21 ||His tongue is broad and long, [by which he tastes] The highest taste, infinite and unthinkable; The voice of the Self-Born is like that of the Kalavaṅka, And has the most excellent sound. || 22 ||He, the highest of living beings, is of beautiful eyes, like a blue lotus, with eyelashes like those of a bull, Of handsome face, endowed with the immaculate Ūrṇa-hair, Of a head adorned with the Uṣṇīṣa, and of skin, Purified, subtle and of golden colour; || 23 ||Hairs on the body grow separately from each other, Soft and subtle, turning upward and to the right, Hairs on his head are of pure blue colour like sapphires, And his figure is fully circular like a Nyagrodha tree. || 24 ||He, the Great Sage, whose body is firm and possessed of The power of Nārāyaṇa, looks sublime and incomparable; These 32 features of infinite splendour are taught By the Preceptor as the marks of the Lord of Men. || 25 ||It is said that [the Buddha, with 32 marks] has a resemblance to the moon and its reflection in the water. (Kārikā 24) Just as, in autumn, the form of the moon is perceived In the cloudless sky, as well as in a big pond, Reflecting this blue sky on its water-surface; Similarly, the disciples of the Buddha Can perceive the manifestations of the Omnipresent On the surface of the pond-like sphere of the Buddha. || 26 ||
Thus these 10 Powers of the Buddha, kinds of Intrepidity, 18 Exclusive Properties of the Buddha, as well as the 32 Marks of the Superman, being united under one head, make up the number sixty-four.
These 64 properties are to be understood, Along with their causes for attainment, One after the other, according to [the same] order, Through the investigation of the Ratna-sūtra. || 27 ||
Now, of these 64 properties of the Buddha, which have been explained above, the detailed exposition is to be known, according to the same order as before, through the investigation of the Ratnadārikā-sūtra. Also, there have been made illustrations of four kinds about these [4] points, respectively, viz. examples of a thunderbolt, a lion, the space, and the moon reflected in the water. Of these examples, the summarized meaning will be given in the following 12 verses.
Being [respectively] impenetrable, with no misery, Perfectly unique and indifferent, [The Buddha’s Properties] are illustrated By the examples of the thunderbolt, the lion, the space And of the clear moon with her reflection in the water. || 28 ||Of the [10] Powers, six, three, and one, Taken respectively, remove all [the obscurations] On account of the knowable, the concentrations, And of defilements with their potential forces. || 29 ||As if they were piercing an armour, Breaking a wall, and cutting down a tree, The Powers of the Sage are like a thunderbolt, Being heavy, solid, firm and unbreakable. || 30 ||Why are they ‘heavy’? Because they are ‘solid’; Why are they ‘solid’? Because they are ‘firm’; Why are they ‘firm’? Because they are ‘unbreakable’. And being ‘unbreakable’ they are like a thunderbolt. || 31 ||Being fearless, being indifferent, Being firm and accomplishing victory, The lion of Sages is like a [real] lion, Has no fear amidst the assembly of audiences. || 32 ||As he has got all the supernatural faculties, He abides ‘independently’ from any fear, He is ‘indifferent’ [about his superiority], As he is unequal by nature even to the people of purity. || 33 ||He stands ‘firmly’ since his mind is always Concentrated on all the elements of existence, And he is ‘of the highest victory’ Since he has transcended the Dwelling Place of Ignorance. || 34 ||With the worldlings, with the Śrāvakas, With those that act in solitude, with the Wise, And with the Buddha, the Intellect is subtler with one after the other; Therefore, we have illustrations in five kinds. || 35 ||[The first four are] like the earth, water, fire and wind, Because they sustain all the world, [But the Buddha] has a resemblance to space, Because his characters surpass everything mundane and supermundane. || 36 ||These 32 Properties mentioned above Represent the Body of the Absolute, Since they are indivisible from it, As with a gem, the lustre, colour and shape. || 37 ||[On the other hand], the 32 marks are The properties, visible and causing delight in the body, And are based on the two Corporeal Bodies The Apparitional Body and the Body enjoying the Truth. || 38 ||To those who are far from purity and near to it, The pure manifestation of the Corporeal Body is twofold, [One is] in the World, and [the other] in the circle of the Buddha, Just as the moon shows her form in both the sky and the water. || 39 ||
Finished is the third chapter entitled ‘the Properties of the Buddha’, in the ANALYSIS OF THE GERM OF THE JEWELS, a Treatise on the Ultimate Doctrine of the Great Vehicle.
CHAPTER IV. THE ACTS OF THE BUDDHA
XVI. GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE ACTS OF THE BUDDHA
We have finished the explanation of the ‘Immaculate Properties of the Buddha’. Now we shall speak of the functions [aśociated with those Properties], i. e. ‘the Acts of the Buddha’. They are said to be manifested in two modes, i. e. ‘without effort’, and ‘uninterruptedly’. [Therefore] immediately there follow two ślokas referring to the Buddha’s Acts which are characterized as ‘of no effort and interruption’.
(Kārikās 1-2) The acts of the Lord are always effortless With regard to the constitution of the converts, The means of conversion, and its functions [In accordance with the capacity] of the converts, Working in [proper] place and in [proper] time. || 1 ||Having completely established the Vehicle; The ocean of knowledge filled with the multitudes of the excellent virtues, And endowed with the rays of the sun of Merits and Knowledge, And having perceived that Buddhahood, like space, Pervading extensively and of neither limit nor middle, Exists everywhere in all living beings, As the treasure of the immaculate virtues, The Buddhas’ Compassion, like wind, Blows away the net of the cloud-like [Obscurations] Caused by Defilements and Ignorance. || 2||The summarized meaning of these two ślokas is to be known by the following two and eight verses, respectively. To whom, by what means, how far, and when, About these matters, there is no rise of discrimination; Therefore, the Buddha’s Act of conversion Is [working] always ‘without effort’. || 3 ||On account of the action of conversion, ‘Who’ means ‘the constitution to be converted’, ‘By what means’ denotes ‘the manifold means of conversion]’ And ‘where and when’ the ‘place and time [of conversion]’. || 4||Because, [this act of conversion is] non-discriminative With regard to Deliverance and its support, To the result of [partaking of] this support and the receptacle which accepts this result, And to the obscurations [which cover] this receptacle and the condition by which these obscurations are removed. || 5||[Here], ‘Deliverance’ means the 10-fold Stage [of Bodhisattvas], ‘Its cause’ means the 2-fold Accumulation, ‘The result of this Accumulation’ is the Highest Enlightenment, ‘[Its] receptacle’ means the living beings Who accept the Enlightenment. || 6 ||The phrase ‘The obscurations which cover this receptacle’ means The innumerable Defilements, Sub-defilements and Impressions; The phrase ‘The condition by which the obscurations are removed And which works for all time’ means Compassion. || 7||These six points are to be known, Like the ocean and like the sun, Like space and like a treasure, Like clouds and like the wind, respectively. || 8 ||Being [the treasure] of the water of knowledge And of the jewel of virtuous properties, The highest Vehicle is like the ocean; As keeping alive all living beings, The twofold Accumulation is like the sun; || 9 ||Being extensive and of neither end nor middle, The Enlightenment has a resemblance to space; Being of the nature of the Perfect Enlightened One, The living beings are akin to a treasure; || 10 ||Being accidental, pervasive, and unreal, Their defilements are like a multitude of clouds; And, bringing about the dispelling of these, Compassion is like a strong wind. || 11 ||Performing Deliverance for the sake of others, Considering the living beings as one’s own self, And having works of no termination, [The Buddha] Acts ‘uninterruptedly’ as long as the world exists. || 12 ||
XVII. 9 ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE BUDDHA’S ACTS
(§1. Buddha’s Magnanimity.) It was said that Buddhahood is characterized as having neither origination nor extinction. Being such, how is it pośible that from such an immutable Buddhahood, characterized as of no manifestation, the Acts of Buddha manifest in this world; without effort, without discrimination, without interruption, and as long as the world exists?[To answer this question], in order to produce the faith in the sphere of the Buddha on the part of those people who have misconception and doubt about the Buddha’s nature of magnanimity, we have one śloka with regard to this magnanimous character of the Buddha.
(Kārikā 3) Like Indra, like the divine drum, Like clouds, like Brahma, and like the sun, Like the wish-fulfilling gem, like an echo, Like space and like the earth, Such is the Buddha [in his acts]. || 13 ||
(§ 2, 9 Illustrations taken from the Jñānāloka_alaṅkārasūtra.) Now, of this śloka which represents the topics in the Scripture; a detailed exposition will be given topic by topic in the remaining part of the text according to the same order. (I) It is said that [the Buddha has] a resemblance to the form of Indra.
(Kārikās 4-20) Suppose here were a surface Made of an immaculate Vaiḍūrya stone, And, owing to its clarity, there were seen on it The chief of the gods, with the multitude of Apsaras, || 14 || As well as his great place called Vaijayanta, Other gods and their various dwellings Along with their divine glories. || 15 ||Suppose then, the multitudes of men and women Abiding on this surface of the earth, Would perceive this vision And make the following prayer: || 16 || “May we too, at an early date, Become like that chieftain of the gods!” And, in order to obtain that state, They would abide adopting the virtues. || 17 ||Though having no notice that this is merely a vision, They, owing to their virtuous conduct, Would pass away from the earth and be borne to heaven. || 18 ||After all, it is an illusion, Of no thought-construction and no activity; Nevertheless, it would appear on the earth, Being aśociated with a great benefit. || 19 ||In the same way, the living beings, If they were pure in their faith and so forth, And were endowed with virtues, faith and the like, Would perceive in their own minds the vision of the Buddha, || 20 ||Who is endowed with the visible features and marks, Who acts in manifold actual behavior like Walking, standing, sitting and sleeping, || 21 ||Preaching the Doctrine of Quiescence, being silent, Abiding in concentration of mind and showing The various miracles, and who has the great glory. || 22 ||Having seen him, the people who are filled with desire, Undertake the attainment of the Buddhahood, And, having brought the factors to development They do attain the desired state. || 23 ||After all, it is an illusion, of no thought-construction and no activity; nevertheless, it appears in the world, being associated with a great benefit. || 24 ||Ordinary people do not notice that this is merely a reflection of their own mind; still this manifestation of the Buddha’s features is useful for fulfilling their aim. || 25 ||Indeed, those who, having seen this vision, Have gradually established them selves in this method, Perceive, with the eyes of transcendental wisdom, The Body of the Highest Truth within them selves. || 26 ||Suppose, the earth, having become completely free from unevenness And having become pure from within, would be as clear and white As the Vaiḍūrya stone, [because of its] being possessed of The immaculate qualities of jewel and of pure even surface; And, owing to its purity, there would appear on its [surface] The palace of Indra occupied by gods around him as a vision, But, as this earth would gradually lose its qualities, The vision [thereof] would subsequently disappear. || 27 ||For obtaining that state, the multitudes of men and women, Whose mind intends to perform charity and the rest, Through observing rules regarding fast and conduct, Would scatter flowers with minds full of sublime desire. Similarly, for obtaining the shadow of the Lord of Sages On their mind which is radiant like the Vaiḍūrya stone, The sons of the Buddha, with minds full of delight, Produce various pictures [showing the Buddha’s life, etc.] || 28 ||Just as, on the pure surface of the Vaiḍūrya stone, There appears the reflection of the body of the highest god; Similarly, on the pure surface of the mind in the world, There appears the reflection of the body of the Highest Sage. || 29||The appearance and disappearance of this reflection Occur due to the condition of one’s own mind, Whether it be pure or impure, [respectively], And, as the feature [of Indra or of the Buddha] Is seen only as a vision in this world, So one should not see it as either real or unreal. || 30 ||
(II) It is said that [the word of the Buddha] has a resemblance with the celestial drum.
(Kārikās 21-25) Just as, in the heaven of the gods, Owing to the previous, virtuous experiences, The divine drum, being apart from efforts; From a particular place, from forms of mind, And from thought-constructions, || 31 ||Alarms all the inattentive gods again and again, By producing the sounds of ‘evanescence’, of ‘suffering’, Of ‘impersonality’ and of ‘quiescence’; || 32 ||Similarly, in this world, the Buddha who is all-pervading And free from effort and the rest, Teaches the Doctrine by his voice Towards the worthy without exception. || 33 ||Just as, in the heaven of the gods, the sound Of the divine drum arises due to their own deeds, Similarly, in this world, the Doctrine, Though it is preached by the Buddha, arises [in fact] Owing to the [previous] own deeds of the people; And just as the [celestial] sound, being devoid of Effort, place, form and thought-construction, Brings forth quiescence; Similarly, this Doctrine, devoid of those four, Brings forth Nirvāṇa. || 34 ||At the time of the trouble of battle, in the city of gods, There is destruction of the victorious play of the Asuras’ army Which is caused by the sound of drum And gives fearlessness [among the gods]; Similarly, in this world, in preaching the Highest Path, [Buddha’s] speech destroys, the defilements And pacifies the sufferings in the living beings, Which is due to various practices like contemplations, Concentrations in the Immaterial Sphere and the rest. || 35 ||
(On the superiority of the drum over the other musical instruments). Now, why has the sound of the drum of Doctrine alone been referred to and not the cymbals and the other kinds of celestial instrument? These are likewise produced owing to the previous virtuous deeds made by the gods and make sound agreeable to the ear of deities. [To this, we will answer: They are not referred to] because they have four points of diśimilarity to the Buddha’s voice.Then, which are these [four]? They are, namely, partiality; 2) lack of benefit; 3) unpleasantness; and 4) unconduciveness to Deliverance. [On the other hand] the drum of Doctrine summons the multitudes of inattentive gods without exception and sounds at the right time. For this reason it is explained as being, ‘not partial’. Owing to its protecting [gods] from the fear of calamity caused by the invasion of Asuras and others, and owing to its enjoining [them] to take heed, its ‘beneficiality’ is mentioned.Owing to its distinguishing bliss from the pleasure caused by evil enjoyment and to its bringing forth pleasant bliss in taking delight in the Doctrine, it is said to be ‘blissful’. [And lastly], Owing to its delivering the sounds of ‘evanescence’, ‘suffering’, ‘non-substantiality‘ and ‘impersonality’, and to its pacifying all misfortune and perturbation, the drum is explained as being ‘conducive to deliverance’. In short, the circle of the Buddha’s voice is qualified as being similar to the drum of Doctrine through these four points.
In regard to distinguishing the circle of the Buddha’s voice, we have one verse.
Being universal, bringing benefit and bliss, And being endowed with the threefold miraculous power, The voice of the Buddha is superior To [the sound of] the celestial cymbals. || 36 ||
Now, of these four points, a brief explanation will be given in the following four verses.
The sounds of drums in heaven, though be great, cannot reach the ears of those abiding on the earth; In this world, however, the sound of the drum of Buddha Reaches even those in the lowest sphere of Saṃsāra. || 37 ||In heaven, the divine cymbals of a million kinds Sound only in order to kindle the flame of desire, But one voice of those full of Compassion Sounds in order to extinguish the cause of the fire of suffering. || 38 ||The sounds of cymbals in heaven, though they be pure and pleasant, Are the causes for increasing the elation of mind, The voice of 1he great Buddhas, however, Speaks of the concentration of mind in meditation. || 39 ||In short, that which is the cause of bliss, In heaven, on earth, as well as In all the other numberless worlds, Is the voice [of the Buddha] which manifests Pervadingly in the world leaving no residue; And in respect to those points, thus it is illustrated. || 40 ||
Now, it is indicated that the all-pervadingness [of the Buddha] through the manifestation of body in all the worlds of the ten directions shows [his] ‘manifestation of miracles by the supernatural power’. The illumination of the thicket of mental conduct of living beings, as involved in the mind, by knowing the variety of spiritual elements, this is called the ‘manifestation of miracle through mind-reading’.And, with reference to the Path leading to Deliverance, [the Buddha] preaches and instructs that Path [to the others] by the example of the utterance of his voice. This is called ‘the manifestation of miracle through instruction’. Thus the circle of Buddha’s voice is, like space, unimpeded and acts without interruption, but still this voice cannot be caught everywhere or in its full extent. This is, however, not at all the fault of the circle of the Buddha’s voice.In order to explain this point, with reference to the self-fault of those who are not attentive, there is one śloka.
(Kārikā 26) Just as a deaf person cannot hear a subtle voice, Or even to a man of divine ears, Not all sounds become audible, Similarly, being the object of the most subtle Wisdom, The Doctrine, of subtle character, becomes audible Only to one whose mind is free from defilements. || 41 ||
(III) It is said that [the mind of the Buddha in its activity] is like a cloud. (Kārikās 27-30) Just as, in the rainy season, the clouds discharge, without any effort, The multitudes of water on the earth, Causing abundance of harvest; || 42 ||
In a similar manner, the Buddha Discharges the rain of the Highest Doctrine From the clouds of Compassion, with no searching thought, For [bringing] the crops of virtue among the living beings. || 43 ||Just as the clouds discharge the rain, Agitated by the wind, upon the earth where The people behave in the path of virtuous actions; Similarly, the cloud that is the Buddha Pours the rain of the Highest Doctrine As the virtues are increased in the world Owing to the wind of Compassion. || 44 ||Bearing Wisdom and Compassion, Abiding in the celestial sphere Without affecting anything, neither perishable nor imperishable, And being the womb of the pure water Of meditation and mystical formulas, The cloud-like chieftain of sages Causes the pure crops in various worlds. || 45 ||With reference to the unequality of receptacles in measure, (Kārikā 31) Cool, sweet, clear, soft, and light Is the rain descending from the cloud, But having touched on earth the places filled with salt, etc., Becomes of tastes of much variety; Similar is the rain of the 8-fold Holy Path, Descending from the cloud, the womb abundant with Compassion, But, owing to the variety of conditions of individuals, It assumes many kinds of taste in the living beings. || 46 ||On the impartial attitude, (Kārikās 32-34) Those who have faith in the Highest Vehicle, Those of intermediate nature, and those who resist the Doctrine, These are the three kinds of living beings, And have similarity with men, peacocks and ghosts, respectively. || 47 ||Towards the end of the summer, being of no cloud, Men and those birds who cannot fly in the sky Experience sufferings [from lack of rain]; In the rainy season, however, because of much rainfall, The ghosts in the ground experience sufferings; In the case of the living beings in the world, Those desirous of the Doctrine and those hostile to it, The non-arising and the arising of the water of Doctrine From the clouds of Compassion [cause suffering in each turn]; This is the point of similarity. || 48 ||Discharging the gross drop of rain, hail and lightning, The cloud does not care about the subtle living beings; Nor about those who are on a trip in the mountains; Similarly, the one who holds the waters of Wisdom and Compassion, [Discharging them] with various means, methods and rules, subtle or gross, Does not mind anywhere those who are of Defilements, Whether [in the burst of] egoistic view or in a dormant state. || 49 ||On [the function of] calming the fire of Suffering, (Kārikās 35-37) The [succession] of birth and death in beginningless time Is the Saṃsāra, in whose course there are five Paths, And in these five Paths, there is no happiness, Just as excretion has no good smell at all; Its suffering is constant and as if produced from The contact with fire, swords, ice, salt and so forth; But, to pacify it, the cloud of Compassion Lets fall the great rain of the Highest Doctrine. || 50 ||Having known that the transmigration [from heaven], Is the suffering among gods, and, for the human beings, The searching for the objects of desire is the suffering, The Wise men never seek for the best glory among gods and men; It is because of their Transcendental Intellect, Because of their following the faith in the Buddha’s words, And [consequently], because of their realizing analytically, “This is suffering, this is its cause, and this is its extinction”. || 51 ||Illness is to be cognized, its cause removed, Health should be attained, and a remedy used; Like that, Suffering, its Cause, Extinction and the Path, Are to be cognized, removed, touched and observed. || 52 ||(IV) It is said that [the Buddha’s apparitional form] is like the great Brahmā. (Kārikās 38-41) Just as Brahmā, without moving from his palace, Manifests his apparition, without any effort, In the world of gods everywhere; || 53 ||Similarly, the Buddha, without moving from the Absolute Body, Comes to the sight of the worthy, without any effort, With his apparitional form, in all the worlds. || 54 ||Just as with Brahmā, though he never moves from his palace, His manifestation, always pervading the World of Desire, Is seen by gods and causes them to remove the desire of objects lit); Similarly with the Lord, though not moving from the Absolute Body. His sight is seen by the worthy people, in all the worlds, And causes them to remove all the stains forever. || 55 ||Because of his own original vow, And of the pure experiences of the multitudes of gods, Brahmā manifests his apparition without any effort; Similar is the Buddha, by means of his Apparitional Body. || 56 ||On the invisibility [of the Apparitional form to some people], (Kārikā 42) Descent from [the Tuṣita], entrance in the womb, Birth, and the arrival at his father’s palace, Merry life [in the harem], wandering in solitude, The victory over the Evil One, The attainment of the Supreme Enlightenment, And the teaching of the Path leading to the city of Peace, The Buddha, though demonstrating such events, Does not come to the eye-sight of those who are unhappy. || 57 ||(V) It is said that the Buddha [in his Wisdom] is like the sun. (Kārikā 43) When the sun becomes shining, at one and the same time The lotus flowers awake and the Kumuda folds its flowers; But the sun has no discrimination in regard to the water-born flowers. Similar is the sun of the Saint [in his acts] in the world In regard to the awakening of virtues and closing of defects. || 58 ||(On the two kinds of people compared to the two kinds of waterborn flowers). There are two kinds among the living beings: one is the non-converts and the other is the converts. Of them, with reference to the converts, there are the simile of the sun-lotus and the simile of the receptacle of pure water. Just as the sun, without thought-construction, With his own rays, simultaneously everywhere, Lets the lotus flowers come to blośom, And lets the other come to ripeness; || 59 ||Similarly, the sun that is the Buddha, With the rays of the Highest Doctrine, Appears with no thought-construction, Upon the converts resembling lotus flowers. || 60 ||With the body of the Absolute and that of Apparition, Arising in the sky of the Seat of Enlightenment, The sun of Omniscience pervades the world With the rays of the Transcendental Wisdom; || 61 ||From which, everywhere in the [mind of] converts Who are like receptacles of pure water, Appear simultaneously innumerable reflections Of that sun which is the Lord. || 62 ||Thus the Buddhas, though they are non-discriminative, manifest themselves with visible forms and by teaching among the three categories of living beings according to order. With reference to this order, there is a simile of mountains: (Kārikās 44-45) Although the sun of the Buddha pervades Always and everywhere the sky-like Universe, He casts his rays upon the converts Who are like mountains, according to their merit. || 63 ||Just as, in this world, the sun, Spreading out his thousands of glorious rays, Rising and illuminating the whole world, Shines upon the mountains, high, middle, and low, gradually; Upon the groups of living beings, according to their order. || 64 ||On the superiority of [the Buddha’s] light to [that of the sun], (Kārikās 46-47) Of the sun, there does not exist the all-pervadingness In all kinds of lands and in the whole sky, Nor does he show all things knowable [by removing] The thicket of the darkness of ignorance; But those who are of the nature of Compassion, Illuminate the world with spreading bands of rays, Produced from each hair and filled with various colours, And manifest all things knowable. || 65 ||When the Buddhas enter the city; Those who are of no eyes perceive the object, And, having seen it, cognize how to remove the net of harm, And [likewise] even those blinded by ignorance, Who have fallen into the sea of the Phenomenal World, And are obscured by the darkness of false views, Have their intellect illumined by the light of the sun of the Buddha, And come to perceive the Truth unseen before. || 66 ||(VI) It is said that [the Buddha’s mind in its acts] has a resemblance to the wish-fulfilling gem. (Kārikās 48-50) Just as the wish-fulfilling gem, Though itself is of no thought-construction, Fulfils all desires of those Living in the same region, separately; || 67 ||Similarly, those who are of different inclinations, Having approached the wish-fulfilling gem of the Buddha, Come to hear the Truth in its various aspects. But the Buddha has no discrimination regarding them. || 68 ||Just as the precious jewel, having no thought-construction, Produces the desired treasure, without effort, for others; Similarly, the Lord always benefits others, without effort, According to their merit, as long as the world exists. || 69 ||It is said that the Buddhas are difficult to obtain. (Kārikā 51) Here, in this world, it is quite rare To obtain the pure gem, even though the people so much Long for it in the depth of the ocean or under the ground; Similarly, the sight of Buddha should be known as Not easily achieved in this luckleś world By those whose mind is afflicted by various passions. || 70 ||(VII) It is said that [the Buddha in his voice] is like an echo. (Kārikās 52-53) Just as the sound of an echo Arising from the voice of others Is of no discrimination and of no effort, And has no foundation, either inside or outside; || 71 ||In a similar way, the voice of the Buddha Arising through the voice of others Is of no discrimination and of no effort, And has no foundation, either inside or outside. || 72 ||(VIII) It is said that [the Buddha’s body is] like space. (Kārikās 54-55) Being immaterial and invisible, Without support and without foundation, Surpaśing the way of eye-sight, Formless and incapable of being shown, || 73 ||Though being so, the sky is seen as low and high, But, in reality, it is not like that; Similarly, all kinds of forms are seen in the Buddha, But, in reality, the Buddha is not like that. || 74 ||(IX) It is said that [the Buddha as the foundation of all activities] is like the earth. (Kārikās 56-57) Just as all plants, Taking resort to the earth Which has no searching thought, Come to grow, thrive and expand; || 75 ||Similarly, the roots of virtues in the world, Taking resort to the ground of the Buddha Who has no searching thought, Proceed completely towards growth. || 76 ||(§3. Summarized Meaning of the Illustrations given by the Commentator.) Summarized meaning of these examples is as follows: The performance of actions without effort Cannot be seen by us. Therefore, The nine-fold examples have been related In order to clear the doubts of the converts. || 77 ||Its purpose [of teaching] is explained By the very name of that Scripture, Where these nine illustrations Are demonstrated in detail. || 78 ||Adorned with this light of the great wisdom Which is the result of study, The wise men enter rapidly In the whole region of the Buddha. || 79 ||For this reason, there are nine examples Illustrated by the reflection of Indra On the surface of Vaiḍūrya stone, and the rest. In this sense, you should know their summarized meaning; || 80 ||[Namely]: appearance, teaching, pervasion, Transformation and emanation of Wisdom, Secrecy in acts by mind, speech and body, And acquisition of those whose nature is of Compassion. || 81 ||[The Buddha’s] mind, being of no thought-construction, Is such in which all the movements of effort are pacified As given in the examples, beginning with the arising Of the reflection of Indra on the pure Vaiḍūrya stone. || 82 ||The ‘proposition’ here the pacification of effort, The ‘logical reason’ is the non-discriminativeness of mind, And, in order to establish the subject in discussion’, There are given ‘examples’, the form of Indra, etc. || 83 ||And here the ‘subject in discussion’ is that These nine, ‘appearance’ and the rest, Are manifested without any effort And without birth or death of the Preceptor. || 84 ||(§4. Summary of examples given in Kārikās.) With reference to this meaning (or subject), we have other four ślokas, being the summary of all the examples. (Kārikās 58-61) The one who acts for the sake of others, Without effort, as long as the world exists, Like Indra, like the divine drum, like clouds, Like Brahmā, like the sun, like the wish-fulfilling gem, Like an echo, like the sky and like the earth, . . . That is [the Buddha] who knows a means [of precept]. || 85 ||The excellent teacher has an appearance Like the reflection of the chief of gods on the jewel, His voice is like the [sound of] the divine drum, Having the great sphere of the clouds of Wisdom and Mercy, He pervades an unlimited number of living beings, Up to the highest limit of existence. || 86 ||Like Brahmā; the Buddha Shows himself variously with the apparitional forms, Without moving from the immaculate place; Like the sun, he shines always, spreading the light of Wisdom; And his mind [acts] like the wish-fulfi1ling gem. || 87 ||Like an echo is the Buddha’s voice, Not being expressed by letters; Like space is his body, Being all-pervading, formless and eternal; And like the earth is the State of Buddha in this world, Being the seat of all virtues, the remedy of the whole world. || 88 ||(§5. Non-origination and Non-extinction of the Buddhahood.) Why, then, in this exposition of examples, is the Buddha, who is always of neither origination nor extinction, explained to be seen with appearance and disappearance and as having actions, to work among all living beings, without effort and without interruption? [To answer this question, there are three verses].Like the Vaiḍūrya stone, the purity in the mind Is the cause of the Buddha’s appearance, And this purity of mind is intensified By the irresistible faculty of faith. || 89 ||Owing to the appearance and disappearance of purity, The forms of the Buddha appear and disappear; But, in his Body of the Absolute that is like Indra, The Lord does never appear nor disappear. || 90 ||Thus, his actions, apparition and the rest, Are manifested without any effort, From the Absolute Body, which never arises nor disappears, As long as the world exists. || 91 ||(§6. The Point of Diśimilarity.) This is the summarized meaning of similes And this very order is told in order to show That the diśimilarity of the former example [With the Buddha] is removed by the latter one. || 92 ||Buddhahood is like the reflection [of Indra], But the reflection, being of no voice, is not like that; [Being endowed with voice, the Buddha] is like The divine drum, which however does not match him, Since it is not everywhere making benefits. || 93 ||[Being beneficial everywhere], he is like a big cloud, Which however, having no seed of virtue, is not like him; [Being the root of virtue], he is like great Brahmā, But, being unable to ripen perfectly, Brahmā not like him. || 94 ||[As the cause of perfect maturity], he is like the sun, But the sun cannot remove darkness fully, so it is not like him, [As the darkness-breaker], he is like the wish-fulfilling gem, Which, however, is not as difficult to get as he is. || 95 ||The Buddha has a resemblance to an echo, Which however, being a production of causes, is not like him, [Being of no causes] he has a resemblance to space, Which, not being the basis of virtues, is not like him. || 96 ||The Buddha resembles the region of the earth, Since he is the ground and foundation For the achievement of all the virtues Of living beings, mundane and supermundane. || 97 ||By resorting to the Buddha’s Enlightenment, There arises the supermundane Path, and hence, There emerges the Path of virtuous actions, Consisting or meditation, the immeasurable mind And the absorption in the Immaterial Sphere. || 98 ||
Finished is the fourth chapter entiled ‘the Acts or the Buddha’, in the ANALYSIS OF THE GERM OF THE JEWELS, a Treatise on the Ultimate Doctrine of the Great Vehicle with the commentary [named], the Summary of Meaning of the ślokas.
CHAPTER V. THE MERITS OF FAITH
XVIII. THE MERITS OF HAVING FAITH IN THE DOCTRINE OF THE ESSENCE OF BUDDHAHOOD
(§1. The Superiority of Faith over Other Virtues in Regard to Their Merits.) Hereafter, with reference to the advantage of faith possessed by those who are believing in these [4] subjects which have been duly described above, we have six ślokas.
(Kārikās 1-6) The Essence of Buddhahood, the Enlightenment of the Buddha, The Buddha’s Properties, and the Buddha’s Acts, They are inconceivable even to those of the pure mind, Being the exclusive sphere of the Leaders. || 1 ||But the wise one, whose intellect accepts the faith In this exclusive sphere of the Buddha, Becomes a receptacle of the whole collection of properties, And, being possessed of the desire [to obtain] The inconceivable properties [of the Buddha], He surpaśes the abundance of merits of all living beings. || 2 ||Suppose there were one who, being anxious to obtain the Enlightenment, Would offer golden lands, constructed by jewels As innumerable as the sands in the Buddha’s lands, To the Lord of Doctrine, always, day after day; Another if he hear but one word of this teaching, After hearing of it, would have faith in this Doctrine; The latter would reap merits far more than the merits of an offering. || 3 ||Suppose a wise man, being desirous of the Highest Enlightenment, Would keep pure moral conduct by his body, speech and mind, Without effort, in course of innumerable aeons; Another, if he hear but one word of this teaching, After hearing of it, would have faith in this Doctrine; The latter would reap merits far more than the merits of morality. || 4 ||Suppose one would give himself up to the mystic absorption; Which suppreśes the fire of defilements in the worlds, And, having been transferred to the abode of Brahman in heaven, Would be irreversible from the means of Enlightenment; Another, if he hear but one word of this teaching, After hearing of it, would have faith in this Doctrine; The latter would reap merits far more than even the merits of the mystic absorption. || 5 ||Charity brings people only to [worldly] enjoyment, Morality leads people to the blissful world, And meditation is conducive to the removal of Defilements, But the Transcendental Intellect can remove All [the obscurations of] defilements and ignorance. Therefore, Intellect is the supreme one [of all virtues] And its very source is the study of this Doctrine. || 6 ||The summarized meaning of these ślokas should be known by the following 9 verses. The basis [of Buddhahood], its transformation, Its properties and the performance of welfare, In these four aspects of the sphere of Buddha’s Wisdom, Which have been explained above, || 7 ||The wise one has become full of faith With regard to its existence, power and virtue, Therefore, he quickly attains the potentialit yOf acquiring the state of the Tathāgata. || 8 ||Indeed, as he is full of devotion and faith That there exists ‘this’ inconceivable sphere, That it ‘can’ be realized by one like him, And this sphere, ‘endowed with such virtues’ has been attained, || 9 ||So in him the mind intent on Enlightenment, Being a receptacle of virtues like zeal, energy, Memory, contemplation, Transcendental Intellect, etc., Comes to exist always. || 10 ||As this mind constantly exists, The son of the Buddha becomes irreversible, And he reaches the accomplishment and the perfect purity, With regard to the Highest of Merits. || 11 ||‘The [Highest of] Merits’ means the [first] Highest virtues, ‘Its accomplishment’ is owing to his being non-discriminative With regard to the three aspects [of activity], And ‘the perfect purity’ is caused by his removal of the opponents. || 12 ||Charity is the merit consisting of granting gift, Morality is the merit consisting of moral conduct, And both Patience and Meditation, is that of practice, But Exertion is the merit common to all. || 13 ||Discrimination regarding the aspects of activity, That is the Obscuration of Ignorance; The opponents [to the Highest Virtues], jealousy, etc., They are the Obscurations of Defilements. || 14 ||But, without the Highest Intellect, The other cannot be the cause of their removal; Therefore, the Highest Intellect is the supreme one of all, And, as the source of it is the study [of this Doctrine], It is this study that is the most important. || 15 ||(§2. Authority, Motive, and Characteristics of This Text Being the Correct Doctrine.) [Hereafter we have ślokas mentioning on which basis, for what motive, and how this doctrine has been explained and what characteristics it has. First of all, with reference to the basis and motive, there is one śloka]. (Kārikā 7) Thus, on the basis of the authoritative Scripture and of Logic, This treatise is expounded by me in order to attain Perfect purification for myself, exclusively; At the same time, however, this is in order to aśist Those intelligent people who are endowed with faith And accomplishment of virtues. || 16 ||[Next we have one śloka stating how this treatise is explained]. (Kārikā 8) Just as, with the aid of a lamp, of lightning, Of a precious stone, of the moon and the sun, Those possessed of vision can perceive objects; Similarly, I have expounded this treatise Relying upon the Lord who is the sun Manifesting the Doctrine of great welfare. || 17 ||[Then we have one śloka stating the characteristics of the correct doctrine]. (Kārikā 9) Whatever the word that is connected with the scriptural texts It pursues the [ultimate] aim [of living beings], Is conducive to removing the Defilements in the Worlds, And can demonstrate the advantage of Quiescence, Such a word is that of the Great Sage, And all others are of perverse character. || 18 ||[Next we have one śloka stating by what means this treatise is explained]. (Kārikā 10) Whatever is spoken by those whose mind is not distracted And who refer to the Lord as the only Preceptor, And is favourable to the Path of the [2] Accumulations which lead to Emancipation, That is also to be accepted with respect As if it were taught by the Great Sage. || 19 ||(§3. The Means of Preserving Oneself within the Doctrine.) [Here we have two ślokas referring to the means of preserving oneself from becoming deprived (of this Doctrine)] (Kārikās 11-12) Indeed in this world there is no one wiser than the Buddha, No other who is omniscient and knows completely The highest Truth according to the right method; Therefore, the Scripture should not be interpolated, Which is discoursed by the Sage himself, Otherwise, it will do harm to the Highest Doctrine Because of destroying the teaching of the Buddha. || 20 ||The fact that people abuse the Sages And blame the doctrine taught by the Sages, All this is the Defilement of those whose nature is foolish And is created by a prejudiced conception; Therefore, your mind should not be attached To the dirt of the prejudiced conception; Indeed, only clean cloth can be dyed But not one that is spoiled by oil and dust. || 21 ||(§4. Causes and Results of the loss of the Doctrine.) [With reference to the causes of the loss of the Doctrine, there is one śloka]. (Kārikā 13) Want of intelligence, want of faith in the virtuous Doctrine, Indulgence in false pride, Obscured nature through the rejection of the Highest Doctrine, Interpretation of the conventional sense as the [ultimate] Truth, Greediness, [adherence to] false conception, Devotion to those who hate the Doctrine, Keeping at distance from those who convey the Doctrine, And delighting in the inferior Doctrine, By all this, one becomes deprived of the Doctrine of the Saint. || 22 ||[With reference to the result of this loss, there are two ślokas]. (Kārikās 14-15) The wise one need not be so much afraid of fire, Of violent poison of snake, of murder, or of lightning, As he should be afraid of the loss of the profound Doctrine, Because a fire, a snake, an enemy, and lightning, At most, may deprive one of [this] life But one will not go, by these causes, To the most terrible world of Avīci. || 23 ||Even one who, repeatedly serving bad friends, Is hostile to the Buddha, and commits the acts Of killing mother, father, and the Saints, And breaks the unity of the Highest Community, Even that one can quickly become delivered from that sin If he meditates upon the meaning of the Doctrine; But, how would it be pośible for the Liberation to arise In one whose mind is hostile to the Doctrine! || 24 ||(§5. Conclusion.) [Here, at the end we have one śloka in order to turn the merit acquired by the author through this teaching towards the people]. (Kārikā 16) I have thus duly expounded the subjects, The Jewels, the perfectly pure Essence, The Immaculate Enlightenment, the [Buddha’s] Properties and Acts; By the merit I have acquired through this, May all living beings come to perceive The Lord Amitāyus endowed with infinite light, And, having seen him, may they, owing to the arising Of the immaculate vision of the Doctrine in them, Obtain the Supreme Enlightenment. || 25 ||The summary of topics discussed in these 10 ślokas (vv. 16-25) should be known by the following verses. Owing to what basis, for what motive, How and what is expounded [in this treatise], And what is the natural outflow [of the Buddha’s Doctrine], These topics are explained by the [first] ślokas. || 26 ||Two ślokas refer to the means of self-protection, And one, to the cause of the loss [of the Doctrine], And then, the [following] two ślokas Explain the result of this loś. || 27 ||And finally, the acceptance [of the Doctrine] By those living in the world of Saṃsāra And their acquisition of Enlightenment; In short, these results of teaching of the meaning Of the Doctrine are explained by the last śloka. || 28 ||
Thus is finished the fifth chapter entitled ‘the Merits of Faith’ in the ANALYSIS OF THE GERM OF THE JEWELS, a Treatise on the Ultimate Doctrine of the Great Vehicle with the commentary [named] ‘the Summary of meaning of the ślokas’. || 5 ||